57. 习近平2018年新年贺词
同志们，朋友们，女士们，先生们：
Comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen,
大家好！时光飞逝，转眼我们将迎来2018年。在这里，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞、澳门特别行政区同胞、台湾同胞和海外侨胞致以新年的祝福！我也祝愿世界各国各地区的朋友们万事如意！
Greetings to you all! Time flies and we will soon welcome 2018. Here, I would like to extend my New Year greetings to the people of all ethnic groups in China, to our compatriots in the Hong Kong SAR and the Macao SAR, to our compatriots in Taiwan and to overseas Chinese. I would also like to wish our friends in other countries and regions all the very best.
天道酬勤，日新月异。2017年，我们召开了中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会，开启了全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程。我国国内生产总值迈上80万亿元人民币的台阶，城乡新增就业1300多万人，社会养老保险已经覆盖9亿多人，基本医疗保险已经覆盖13.5亿人，又有1000多万农村贫困人口实现脱贫。“安得广厦千万间，大庇天下寒士俱欢颜！” 340万贫困人口实现易地扶贫搬迁、有了温暖的新家，各类棚户区改造开工数提前完成600万套目标任务。各项民生事业加快发展，生态环境逐步改善，人民群众有了更多获得感、幸福感、安全感。我们朝着实现全面建成小康社会目标又迈进了一大步。
Fortune rewards the diligent and times are changing fast. In 2017, we held the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and embarked on a new journey to fully build a modern socialist China. Our GDP rose to the level of 80 trillion yuan ($ 12.3 trillion). Over 13 million urban and rural jobs were created. Our old-age insurance system now covers more than 900 million people, and 1.35 billion people are covered by basic medical insurance. More than 10 million rural residents were lifted out of poverty. "How I wish I could have ten thousand houses, to provide shelter for all who need it!" 3.4 million people were relocated from poverty-stricken areas and now live in new warm housing. The construction of 6 million apartments in shanty areas has begun ahead of schedule. Various initiatives to improve people's livelihoods have been accelerated, and the environment has steadily improved. People's sense of fulfillment, happiness and security have grown stronger. We have taken another great step in finishing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
科技创新、重大工程建设捷报频传。“慧眼”卫星遨游太空，C919大型客机飞上蓝天，量子计算机研制成功，海水稻进行测产，首艘国产航母下水，“海翼”号深海滑翔机完成深海观测，首次海域可燃冰试采成功，洋山四期自动化码头正式开港，港珠澳大桥主体工程全线贯通，复兴号奔驰在祖国广袤的大地上……我为中国人民迸发出来的创造伟力喝彩！
There has been a steady flow of technological innovation and major engineering feats in China. The X-ray satellite Insight is probing deep space. The C919 large airliner took off into the blue sky. A quantum computer was built and became operational. A trial was conducted for rice production in saline soil. We launched the first Chinese-built aircraft carrier. The "Sea Wings" underwater glider completed its first deep-sea exploration. The first extraction of combustible ice was a success. Phase IV of the Shanghai Yangshan Automated Deep Water Port began operations. The main structure of the cross-sea bridge linking Hong Kong, Zhuhai, and Macao was finished. Fuxing bullet trains now criss-cross China's vast landscape. I applaud the Chinese people for their great creativity.
我们在朱日和联合训练基地举行沙场点兵，纪念中国人民解放军建军90周年。香港回归祖国20周年时，我去了香港，亲眼所见，有祖国做坚强后盾，香港保持了长期繁荣稳定，明天必将更加美好。我们还举行了纪念全民族抗战爆发80周年仪式和南京大屠杀死难者国家公祭仪式，以铭记历史、祈愿和平。
We held a military parade at the Zhurihe training base in commemoration of the 90th anniversary of the founding of the People's Liberation Army. During the 20th anniversary of the Hong Kong SAR's return to the motherland, I visited Hong Kong and saw in person that, with the strong support of the motherland, Hong Kong has retained its long term prosperity and stability. It will undoubtedly have an even better future. We also held a ceremony in commemoration of the 80th anniversary of the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and a state memorial ceremony for the victims of the Nanjing Massacre, to remember history and to pray for peace.
我们在国内主办了几场多边外交活动，包括首届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛、金砖国家领导人厦门会晤、中国共产党与世界政党高层对话会等会议。我还参加了一些世界上的重要多边会议。今年年初，我出席达沃斯世界经济论坛年会，并在联合国日内瓦总部作了讲话，后来又出席了二十国集团领导人峰会、亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议等。在这些不同场合，我同有关各方深入交换意见，大家都赞成共同推动构建人类命运共同体，以造福世界各国人民。
We hosted several multilateral diplomatic events in China, including the first Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, the BRICS Summit in Xiamen, and the CPC in Dialogue with World Political Parties High-Level Meeting. I also took part in some major multilateral meetings overseas. At the beginning of the year, I attended the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, and delivered a speech at the UN Headquarters in Geneva. Later, I attended the G20 Summit and the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting. During these occasions, I had many in-depth exchanges of views with concerted parties and they all supported the joint promotion of building a community of shared future for mankind so as to benefit people across the world.
2017年，我又收到很多群众来信，其中有西藏隆子县玉麦乡的乡亲们，有内蒙古苏尼特右旗乌兰牧骑的队员们，有西安交大西迁的老教授，也有南开大学新入伍的大学生，他们的故事让我深受感动。广大人民群众坚持爱国奉献，无怨无悔，让我感到千千万万普通人最伟大，同时让我感到幸福都是奋斗出来的。
In 2017, I again received many letters from the people, including villagers from the Yumai township in Lhunze county in Tibet autonomous region; members of the Wulanmuqi Art Troupe from the Sonid Right Banner in Inner Mongolia autonomous region; veteran professors from the relocated main body of Xi'an Jiaotong University; and new PLA student recruits from Nankai University. Their stories touched me deeply. The people have made sacrifices for the good of the nation without regrets or complaints. I feel the millions of ordinary Chinese are the greatest, and I also feel that happiness is achieved through hard work.
2018年是全面贯彻中共十九大精神的开局之年。中共十九大描绘了我国发展今后30多年的美好蓝图。九层之台，起于累土。要把这个蓝图变为现实，必须不驰于空想、不骛于虚声，一步一个脚印，踏踏实实干好工作。
The year 2018 marked the first year of fully implementing the spirit of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, which outlines China's desired development blueprint over the next three decades. Building a high-rise begins with mounds of soil. To translate the blueprint into reality, we have to avoid the distractions of unsubstantial ideas and superficial fame, take one step at a time, and approach our work with a firm footing.
2018年，我们将迎来改革开放40周年。改革开放是当代中国发展进步的必由之路，是实现中国梦的必由之路。我们要以庆祝改革开放40周年为契机，逢山开路，遇水架桥，将改革进行到底。
2018 marks the 40th anniversary of our reform and opening-up, which has been the only path to the development and progress of contemporary China and the only path to the realization of the Chinese Dream. At the significant juncture of the 40th anniversary, we should surmount all obstacles to carry the reform further to its ultimate triumph.
到2020年我国现行标准下农村贫困人口实现脱贫，是我们的庄严承诺。一诺千金。到2020年只有3年的时间，全社会要行动起来，尽锐出战，精准施策，不断夺取新胜利。3年后如期打赢脱贫攻坚战，这在中华民族几千年历史发展上将是首次整体消除绝对贫困现象，让我们一起来完成这项对中华民族、对整个人类都具有重大意义的伟业。
By 2020, China will lift its rural impoverished population out of poverty by current standards. That is our solemn commitment and we will honor it. With three years left until 2020, the whole of society must leap into action and, with concerted efforts and targeted measures, continuously strive for fresh victories. After three years, we will win the final phase of the war on poverty. This will be the first time in thousands of years of Chinese history that extreme poverty has been eliminated. Let us accomplish this great cause of momentous significance for the Chinese nation and all humanity.
当前，各方对人类和平与发展的前景既有期待、也有忧虑，期待中国表明立场和态度。天下一家。中国作为一个负责任大国，也有话要说。中国坚定维护联合国权威和地位，积极履行应尽的国际义务和责任，信守应对全球气候变化的承诺，积极推动共建“一带一路”，始终做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。中国人民愿同各国人民一道，共同开辟人类更加繁荣、更加安宁的美好未来。
Regarding the prospects of humanity's peace and development, there is both expectation and concern; all sides are awaiting a clear Chinese stance. All under heaven are one family. As a responsible major country, China has something to say. China will resolutely uphold the authority and status of the United Nations, actively fulfill China's international obligations and duties, remain firmly committed to China's pledges to tackle climate change, actively push for the Belt and Road Initiative, and always be a builder of world peace, contributor to global development and keeper of international order. The Chinese people are ready to chart out a more prosperous, peaceful future for humanity, with people from other countries.
我们伟大的发展成就由人民创造，应该由人民共享。我了解人民群众最关心的就是教育、就业、收入、社保、医疗、养老、居住、环境等方面的事情，大家有许多收获，也有不少操心事、烦心事。我们的民生工作还有不少不如人意的地方，这就要求我们增强使命感和责任感，把为人民造福的事情真正办好办实。各级党委、政府和干部要把老百姓的安危冷暖时刻放在心上，以造福人民为最大政绩，想群众之所想，急群众之所急，让人民生活更加幸福美满。
China's great achievement of development was made by the people and for the people. I am aware of the people's biggest concerns, such as education, employment, income, social security, healthcare, old-age security, housing and the environment. Though progress has been made, issues of public concern remain. Our efforts at improving people's well-being have not always been satisfactory. That is why we should strengthen our sense of responsibility, and do a good job of ensuring the people's well-being. The Party committees, governments, and officials at all levels must constantly hold in their hearts the interests and concerns of the people, and regard the benefit of the people as their greatest political achievement; they must think for the people, respond to their needs, and work for the greater happiness of the people.
谢谢大家。
Thank you all!
