121. 国家主席习近平二〇一五年新年贺词
时间过得真快，2014年就要过去了，2015年正在向我们走来。在这辞旧迎新的时刻，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞和澳门特别行政区同胞，向台湾同胞和海外侨胞，向世界各国和各地区的朋友们，致以新年的祝福！	
Time flies. 2014 is coming to an end and 2015 is approaching. At this turn of the year, I wish to extend my best wishes to people of all ethnic groups in China, to our compatriots in the Hong Kong and Macau Special Administrative Regions, to our compatriots in Taiwan and overseas Chinese, as well as to friends in other countries and regions in the world.
2014年是令人难忘的。这一年，我们锐意推进改革，啃下了不少硬骨头，出台了一系列重大改革举措，许多改革举措同老百姓的利益密切相关。我们适应经济发展新常态，积极推动经济社会发展，人民生活有了新的改善。12月12日，南水北调中线一期工程正式通水，沿线40多万人移民搬迁，为这个工程作出了无私奉献，我们要向他们表示敬意，希望他们在新的家园生活幸福。这一年，我们着力正风肃纪，重点反对形式主义、官僚主义、享乐主义和奢靡之风，情况有了很大改观。我们加大反腐败斗争力度，以零容忍的态度严惩腐败分子，显示了反腐惩恶的坚定决心。这一年，我们加强同世界各国的合作交往，主办了北京亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，我国领导人多次出访，外国领导人也大量来访，这些活动让世界更好认识了中国。	
2014 is unforgettable. During the past year, we have pushed forward reform with strong determination, cracked many hard nuts, and introduced a string of major reform measures, many of which are closely related to the interests of the general public. We have adapted to the new normal of economic growth, actively promoted economic and social development, and brought about further improvement in people's lives. On 12 December, the first phase of the central route of the South-North Water Diversion Project went into operation. More than 400,000 people along the route have been relocated. We pay tribute to them for their selfless contribution, and wish them a happy life in their new homes. In the past year, we have endeavored to improve our work style and strengthen party and government discipline, with efforts focusing on fighting against formalism, bureaucracy, hedonism and extravagance. The situation has greatly improved. We have stepped up the fight against corruption and punished corrupt officials with a zero-tolerance attitude, which demonstrates our commitment to fighting against corruption and other evil forces. In the past year, we have enhanced our cooperation and exchanges with countries around the world. We hosted the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in Beijing. Our leaders have visited many countries and received many foreign leaders. These exchanges of visits have helped the world understand China better.
为了做好这些工作，我们的各级干部也是蛮拼的。当然，没有人民支持，这些工作是难以做好的，我要为我们伟大的人民点赞。	
Officials at various levels have spared no efforts to perform their duty. Of course, those achievements would not have been possible without the support of the people. I would like to give a "thumbs up" to our great people.
这一年，我们通过立法确定了中国人民抗日战争胜利纪念日、烈士纪念日、南京大屠杀死难者国家公祭日，举行了隆重活动。对一切为国家、为民族、为和平付出宝贵生命的人们，不管时代怎样变化，我们都要永远铭记他们的牺牲和奉献。	
During the past year, we have established the Victory Day of the Chinese People's War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression, the Martyrs' Day and the National Memorial Day for Victims of the Nanjing Massacre through legislation. These new memorial days included many solemn events. Despite the change of times, we would always remember the sacrifice and contribution of those who gave their lives for the Chinese nation and for peace.
这一年，我们也经历了一些令人悲伤的时刻。马航MH370航班失踪，150多名同胞下落不明，我们没有忘记他们，我们一定要持续努力、想方设法找到他们。这一年，我国发生了一些重大自然灾害和安全事故，不少同胞不幸离开了我们，云南鲁甸地震就造成了600多人遇难，我们怀念他们，祝愿他们的亲人们都安好。	
During the past year, we have also experienced some sad moments. Malaysia Airlines MH370 went missing. The whereabouts of more than 150 of our fellow countrymen remain unknown. We have not forgotten them. We will continue to make all possible efforts to find them. During the past year, our country has also suffered from a number of major natural disasters and work safety accidents, in which some compatriots lost their lives. The Ludian earthquake in Yunnan Province claimed more than 600 lives. Our hearts are with them and we wish their families well.
新年的钟声即将敲响。我们要继续努力，把人民的期待变成我们的行动，把人民的希望变成生活的现实。我们要继续全面深化改革，开弓没有回头箭，改革关头勇者胜。我们要全面推进依法治国，用法治保障人民权益、维护社会公平正义、促进国家发展。我们要让全面深化改革、全面推进依法治国如鸟之两翼、车之双轮，推动全面建成小康社会的目标如期实现。	
The New Year bell is about to ring. We will continue our efforts to act upon people's expectations and turn their aspirations into reality. We will continue to deepen reform in an all-round way. An arrow that has been released makes no turning back. At this critical moment of our reform process, only those who brave hardships would prevail. We must advance the rule of law in an all-round way, and use the rule of law to guarantee people's rights and interests, uphold social equity and justice, and promote national development. For the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in an all-round way to be completed in due course, comprehensively deepening reform and strengthening the rule of law must go forward hand in hand, like the two wings of a bird or the two wheels of a car.
我国人民生活总体越来越好，但我们时刻都要想着那些生活中还有难处的群众。我们要满腔热情做好民生工作，特别是要做好扶贫开发和基本生活保障工作，让农村贫困人口、城市困难群众等所有需要帮助的人们都能生活得到保障、心灵充满温暖。	
The living standards of the Chinese people are constantly improving, but we should always keep in mind those who are still living in hardships. We will work with passion to improve their well-being, with efforts focusing on poverty alleviation and guaranteeing basic living conditions. We will provide assistance to all those in need of help, including poverty-stricken farmers and urban residents with difficulties, so that their basic living conditions are guaranteed and their hearts are filled with warmth.
我们要继续全面推进从严治党，毫不动摇转变作风，高举反腐的利剑，扎牢制度的笼子，在中国共产党领导的社会主义国家里，腐败分子发现一个就要查处一个，有腐必惩，有贪必肃。	
We will continue to comprehensively strengthen party discipline, and unswervingly improve our work style. We will always resort to anti-corruption as a sharp weapon, and consolidate mechanism-building as a cage to contain powers. In this socialist country led by the Communist Party of China, any corrupt official who is exposed must be dealt with. All those involved in corruption and embezzlement must be prosecuted and punished.
我们正在从事的事业是伟大的，坚忍不拔才能胜利，半途而废必将一事无成。我们的蓝图是宏伟的，我们的奋斗必将是艰巨的。全党全国各族人民要团结一心，集思广益用好机遇，众志成城应对挑战，立行立改破解难题，奋发有为进行创新，让国家发展和人民生活一年比一年好。	
We are now pursuing a lofty mission. Only perseverance will lead to victory, while giving up halfway will lead us nowhere. Our blueprint is ambitious, but our task is arduous. All party members and people of all ethnic groups in the country must stand united. We must pool our wisdom to seize opportunities, work together to embrace challenges, tackle problems with quick action, and carry on innovation with determination, in order to make China a better country year by year and constantly improve people's living standards.
中国人民关注自己国家的前途，也关注世界的前途。非洲发生了埃博拉疫情，我们给予帮助；马尔代夫首都遭遇断水，我们给予支援，许许多多这样的行动展示了中国人民同各国人民同呼吸、共命运的情怀。当前世界仍很不安宁。我们呼唤和平，我真诚希望，世界各国人民共同努力，让所有的人民免于饥寒的煎熬，让所有的家庭免于战火的威胁，让所有的孩子都能在和平的阳光下茁壮成长。	
The Chinese people care greatly about the country's future and the future of the world. When Ebola emerged in Africa, we offered our help. When a water shortage occurred in the capital of the Maldives, we provided assistance. There are numerous examples like these which demonstrate the spirit of common destiny of the Chinese people and all humanity. The world is not yet a tranquil place. We long for peace and we sincerely hope that people of all countries can work together to ensure that all humanity will be free from the suffering of hunger and all families free from the threat of wars, and that all children can grow up in the sunshine of peace.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!
