128. 习近平在布鲁日欧洲学院的演讲
在布鲁日欧洲学院的演讲
（2014年4月1日，布鲁日）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Speech at the College of Europe
Chinese President Xi Jinping
Bruges, 1 April 2014
尊敬的菲利普国王夫妇，
尊敬的范龙佩主席，
尊敬的迪吕波首相，
尊敬的德维戈主席、莫纳尔院长，
尊敬的各位使节，
老师们，同学们，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Majesties King Philippe and Queen Mathilde,
President Herman Van Rompuy,
Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo,
President Inigo Mendez de Vigo,
Rector Jorg Monar,
Diplomatic Envoys,
Faculty Members,
Students,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
大家好！很高兴来到欧洲学院同大家见面。首先，我向学院的老师们、同学们，向各位关心和支持中国发展的欧洲朋友们，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！	
Good morning! It is a great pleasure for me to come to the College of Europe and meet with faculty members and students. First of all, my warm greetings and best wishes to you and all those in Europe who have shown interest in and support to the development of China.
在弗拉芒语中，布鲁日就是“桥”的意思。桥不仅方便了大家的生活，同时也是沟通、理解、友谊的象征。我这次欧洲之行，就是希望同欧洲朋友一道，在亚欧大陆架起一座友谊和合作之桥。	
In the Flemish language, Bruges means "bridge". A bridge not only makes life more convenient; it could also be a symbol of communication, understanding and friendship. I have come to Europe to build, together with our European friends, a bridge of friendship and cooperation across the Eurasian continent.
刚才，我和菲利普国王夫妇一起，参观了位于根特的沃尔沃汽车工厂。这家工厂是比利时最大的汽车生产企业，也是中国、比利时、瑞典三方经济技术合作的典范，在“中国投资”和“欧洲技术”之间架起了一座互利共赢的桥梁。	
Before coming here, I visited a Volvo plant in Ghent together with King Philippe and Queen Mathilde. Volvo Cars Ghent, the largest car manufacturer in Belgium, has become a model of economic and technological cooperation between China, Belgium and Sweden. It has actually set up a bridge linking Chinese investment with European technology. What it leads to is mutual benefit and win-win cooperation.
欧洲学院诞生于第二次世界大战结束之后，是人们反思战争、渴望和平的产物。人类历史总是伴随着战争魔咒。第二次世界大战的惨烈，促使欧洲人民痛定思痛，在让·莫内、罗伯特·舒曼等一批政治家领导下，开始联合自强，为实现持久和平与繁荣而奋斗。	
The College of Europe was created after the end of World War II as a result of people's reflection of the war and their yearning for peace. Human history has far too often been haunted by the specter of war. Having suffered from the calamity of World War II, people in Europe began to think over about their past misery and started to unite, under the leadership of statesmen like Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, in a joint pursuit for lasting peace and prosperity.
经过半个多世纪发展，欧洲学院不仅成为欧盟的重要智库，而且成为“欧洲政治精英的摇篮”。范龙佩先生说，欧洲学院“始终位于欧洲一体化的核心”，体现了“在战争废墟上诞生的欧洲信念”。	
After more than half a century of development, the College today not only serves as an important think tank for the European Union. It is also seen as the cradle of political elites of Europe. In the words of Mr. Van Rompuy, the College has always been "at the heart of European integration" and is in itself an expression of the faith in Europe born "out of the ruins of war".
老师们、同学们！	
Faculty Members,
Students,
就在欧洲学院成立的1949年，中华人民共和国成立了，中华民族的发展从此开启了新的历史纪元。1975年，周恩来总理和索姆斯爵士审时度势，作出了中欧建交的决定。现在，中欧建立了全面战略伙伴关系，在60多个领域建立了对话磋商机制；2013年双方贸易额达到5591亿美元，双方每年人员往来500多万人次，留学生总数近30万人。中欧关系已经成为世界上最具影响力的双边关系之一。
In 1949 when the College of Europe was established, the People's Republic of China was founded, heralding a new historical era in the development of the Chinese nation. Later in 1975, late Chinese premier Zhou Enlai and Sir Christopher Soames, acting on their assessment of the world situation then, decided that China and the European Economic Community should establish diplomatic relations. Today, China and the EU have a comprehensive strategic partnership. We have established dialogue and consultation mechanisms in over 60 areas. Our trade last year reached 559.1 billion US dollars. Over five million visits are exchanged each year. And about 300,000 of our students are studying overseas either in Europe or in China. The relationship between China and the EU has become one of the most important bilateral relationships in the world.
同时，我们也要看到，中欧关系发展空间还很大，潜力还远远没有发挥出来。为了把中欧关系推向前进，中方需要加深对欧洲的了解，欧方也需要加深对中国的了解。历史是现实的根源，任何一个国家的今天都来自昨天。只有了解一个国家从哪里来，才能弄懂这个国家今天怎么会是这样而不是那样，也才能搞清楚这个国家未来会往哪里去和不会往哪里去。	
Having said that, we should not forget that there is still greater room for the growth of China-EU relations and the potential is yet to be fully tapped. To move our relationship forward, China needs to know more about Europe, and Europe needs to know more about China. For any country in the world, the past always holds the key to the present and the present is always rooted in the past. Only when we know where a country has come from, could we possibly understand why the country is what it is today, and only then could we realize in which direction it is heading.
借此机会，我想给大家谈谈中国是一个什么样的国家，希望有助于大家观察中国、研究中国、认识中国。介绍中国是一个很大的课题，我选择中国几个最显著的特点来讲讲。	
So let me use this opportunity to describe to you what a country China is. I hope it will be helpful to you as you try to observe, understand and study China. Of course, a thorough account of the country would be too big a topic for today, so I will just focus on the following few features of China.
第一，中国是有着悠久文明的国家。在世界几大古代文明中，中华文明是没有中断、延续发展至今的文明，已经有5000多年历史了。我们的祖先在几千年前创造的文字至今仍在使用。2000多年前，中国就出现了诸子百家的盛况，老子、孔子、墨子等思想家上究天文、下穷地理，广泛探讨人与人、人与社会、人与自然关系的真谛，提出了博大精深的思想体系。他们提出的很多理念，如孝悌忠信、礼义廉耻、仁者爱人、与人为善、天人合一、道法自然、自强不息等，至今仍然深深影响着中国人的生活。中国人看待世界、看待社会、看待人生，有自己独特的价值体系。中国人独特而悠久的精神世界，让中国人具有很强的民族自信心，也培育了以爱国主义为核心的民族精神。	
First, China has a time-honored civilization. Of the world's ancient civilizations, the Chinese civilization has continued uninterrupted to this day. In fact, it has spanned over 5,000 years. The Chinese characters, invented by our ancestors several millennia ago, are still used today. Over 2,000 years ago, there was an era of great intellectual accomplishments in China, which is referred to as "the period of one hundred masters and schools of thought". Great thinkers such as Laozi, Confucius and Mozi, to name just a few, explored a wide range of topics from the universe to the Earth, and from man's relations with nature to relations amongst human beings and to that between the individual and society. The extensive and profound schools of thought they established covered many important ideas, such as the moral injunction of fidelity to one's parents and brothers and to the monarch and friends, the sense of propriety, justice, integrity and honor, the emphasis on benevolence and kindness towards fellow human beings and the belief that man should be in harmony with nature, follow nature's course and unremittingly pursue self-renewal. These values and teachings still carry a profound impact on Chinese people's way of life today, underpinning the unique value system in the Chinese outlook of the world, of society and of life itself. And this unique and time-honored intellectual legacy has instilled a strong sense of national confidence in the Chinese people and nurtured a national spirit with patriotism at the very core.
第二，中国是经历了深重苦难的国家。在工业革命发生前的几千年时间里，中国经济、科技、文化一直走在世界的第一方阵之中。近代以后，中国的封建统治者夜郎自大、闭关锁国，导致中国落后于时代发展步伐，中国逐步成为半殖民地半封建社会。外国列强入侵不断，中国社会动荡不已，人民生活极度贫困。穷则思变，乱则思定。中国人民经过逾百年前赴后继的不屈抗争，付出几千万人伤亡的巨大牺牲，终于掌握了自己的命运。中国人民对被侵略、被奴役的历史记忆犹新，尤其珍惜今天的生活。中国人民希望和平、反对战争，所以始终奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持不干涉别国内政、也不允许别人干涉中国内政。我们过去一直是这样做的，今后也会这样做下去。	
Second, China has gone through many vicissitudes. For several thousand years before the industrial revolution, China had been leading the world in economic, technological and cultural development. However, feudal rulers of the 18th and 19th centuries closed the door of China in boastful ignorance and China was since left behind in the trend of development. The country was subdued to a semi-colonial and semi-feudal society. As a result of incessant foreign invasions thereafter, China experienced great social turmoil and its people had to lead a life of extreme destitution. Poverty prompted the call for change and people experiencing turmoil aspired for stability. After a hundred years of persistent and unyielding struggle, the Chinese people, sacrificing tens of millions of lives, ultimately took their destiny back into their own hands. Nevertheless, the memory of foreign invasion and bullying has never been erased from the minds of the Chinese people, and that explains why we cherish so dearly the life we lead today. The Chinese people want peace; we do not want war. This is the reason why China follows an independent foreign policy of peace. China is committed to non-interference in other countries' internal affairs, and China will not allow others to interfere in its own affairs. This is the position we have upheld in the past. It is what we will continue to uphold in the future.
第三，中国是实行中国特色社会主义的国家。1911年，孙中山先生领导的辛亥革命，推翻了统治中国几千年的君主专制制度。旧的制度推翻了，中国向何处去？中国人苦苦寻找适合中国国情的道路。君主立宪制、复辟帝制、议会制、多党制、总统制都想过了、试过了，结果都行不通。最后，中国选择了社会主义道路。在建设社会主义实践中，我们有成功也有失误，甚至发生过严重曲折。改革开放以后，在邓小平先生领导下，我们从中国国情和时代要求出发，探索和开拓国家发展道路，形成了中国特色社会主义，提出要建设社会主义市场经济、民主政治、先进文化、和谐社会、生态文明，维护社会公平正义，促进人的全面发展，坚持和平发展，全面建成小康社会，进而实现现代化，逐步实现全体人民共同富裕。独特的文化传统，独特的历史命运，独特的国情，注定了中国必然走适合自己特点的发展道路。我们走出了这样一条道路，并且取得了成功。	
Third, China is a socialist country with Chinese characteristics. In 1911, the revolution led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen overthrew the autocratic monarchy that had ruled China for several thousand years. But once the old system was gone, where China would go became the question. The Chinese people then started exploring long and hard for a path that would suit China's national conditions. They experimented with constitutional monarchy, imperial restoration, parliamentarism, multi-party system and presidential government, yet nothing really worked. Finally, China took on the path of socialism. Admittedly, in the process of building socialism, we have had successful experience and also made mistakes. We have even suffered serious setbacks. After the "reform and opening-up" was launched under the leadership of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, we have, acting in line with China's national conditions and the trend of the times, explored and blazed a trail of development and established socialism with Chinese characteristics. Our aim is to build a socialist market economy, democracy, an advanced culture, a harmonious society and a sound eco-system, uphold social equity and justice, promote all-round development of the people, pursue peaceful development, complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and eventually achieve modernization and ensure prosperity for all. The uniqueness of China's cultural tradition, history and circumstances determines that China needs to follow a development path that suits its own reality. In fact, we have found such a path and achieved success along this path.
第四，中国是世界上最大的发展中国家。中国发展取得了历史性进步，经济总量已经跃升到世界第二位。作为有着13亿多人口的国家，中国用几十年的时间走完了发达国家几百年走过的发展历程，无疑是值得骄傲和自豪的。同时，我们也清醒认识到，中国经济总量虽大，但除以13亿多人口，人均国内生产总值还排在世界第八十位左右。中国城乡低保人口有7400多万人，每年城镇新增劳动力有1000多万人，几亿农村劳动力需要转移就业和落户城镇，还有8500多万残疾人。根据世界银行的标准，中国还有2亿多人口生活在贫困线以下，这差不多相当于法国、德国、英国人口的总和。今年春节前后的40天里，中国航空、铁路、公路承载了大约36亿人次的流动，相当于每天都有9000万人在流动之中。所以，让13亿多人都过上好日子，还需要付出长期的艰苦努力。中国目前的中心任务依然是经济建设，并在经济发展的基础上推动社会全面进步。	
Fourth, China is the world's biggest developing country. China has made historic progress in development. It is now the second largest economy in the world. It has achieved in several decades what took developed countries several centuries to achieve. This is, without doubt, a proud achievement for a country whose population exceeds 1.3 billion. In the meantime, we are clearly aware that the large size of the Chinese economy, when divided by 1.3 billion, sends China to around the 80th place in terms of per capita GDP. In China, over 74 million people rely on basic living allowances; each year, more than 10 million urban people would join the job market and several hundred million rural people need to be transferred to non-agricultural jobs and settle down in urban areas; more than 85 million people are with disabilities; and more than 200 million people are still living under the poverty line set by the World Bank, and that is roughly the population of France, Germany and the UK combined. In the 40-day-long season of the last Chinese New Year, China's airlines, railroads and highways transported 3.6 billion passengers, which means 90 million people were on the move each day. Therefore, to make the lives of the 1.3 billion Chinese people more comfortable requires still arduous efforts for years to come. Economic development remains the top priority for China, and we still need to work on that basis to achieve social progress in all areas.
第五，中国是正在发生深刻变革的国家。我们的先人早就提出了“天行健，君子以自强不息”的思想，强调要“苟日新，日日新，又日新”。在激烈的国际竞争中前行，就如同逆水行舟，不进则退。改革是由问题倒逼而产生，又在不断解决问题中而深化。我们强调，改革开放只有进行时、没有完成时。中国已经进入改革的深水区，需要解决的都是难啃的硬骨头，这个时候需要“明知山有虎，偏向虎山行”的勇气，不断把改革推向前进。我们推进改革的原则是胆子要大、步子要稳。“图难于其易，为大于其细。天下难事，必作于易；天下大事，必作于细。”随着中国改革不断推进，中国必将继续发生深刻变化。同时，我也相信，中国全面深化改革，不仅将为中国现代化建设提供强大推动力量，而且将为世界带来新的发展机遇。	
Fifth, China is a country undergoing profound changes. Our ancestors taught us that "as heaven maintains vigor through movement, a gentleman should constantly strive for self-perfection", and that "if one can make things better for one day, he should make them better every day". Being faced with fierce international competition is like sailing against the current. One either forges ahead or falls behind. Reform, which was first forced upon us by problems, goes deeper in addressing the problems. We know keenly that reform and opening-up is an ongoing process that will never stop. China's reform has entered a deep water zone, where problems crying to be resolved are all difficult ones. What we need is the courage to move the reform forward. To use a Chinese saying, we must "get ready to go into the mountain, being fully aware that there may be tigers to encounter". The principle we have laid down for reform is to act with courage while moving forward with steady steps. As we say in China, he who wants to accomplish a big and difficult undertaking should start with easier things first and make sure that all details are attended to. With the deepening of reform, China will continue to undergo profound changes. I believe that our efforts of deepening reform comprehensively will not only provide strong momentum for China's modernization drive, but also bring new development opportunities to the world.
总之，观察和认识中国，历史和现实都要看，物质和精神也都要看。中华民族5000多年文明史，中国人民近代以来170多年斗争史，中国共产党90多年奋斗史，中华人民共和国60多年发展史，改革开放30多年探索史，这些历史一脉相承，不可割裂。脱离了中国的历史，脱离了中国的文化，脱离了中国人的精神世界，脱离了当代中国的深刻变革，是难以正确认识中国的。	
To observe and understand China properly, one needs to bear in mind both China's past and present and draw reference from both China's accomplishments and the Chinese way of thinking. The 5,000-year-long Chinese civilization, the 170-year struggle by the Chinese people since modern times, the 90-year-plus journey of the Communist Party of China, the 60-year-plus development of the People's Republic and the 30-year-plus reform and opening-up should all be taken into account. They each make an integral part of China's history, and none should be taken out of the historical context. One can hardly understand China well without a proper understanding of China's history, culture, the Chinese people's way of thinking and the profound changes taking place in China today.
世界是多向度发展的，世界历史更不是单线式前进的。中国不能全盘照搬别国的政治制度和发展模式，否则的话不仅会水土不服，而且会带来灾难性后果。2000多年前中国人就认识到了这个道理：“橘生淮南则为橘，生于淮北则为枳，叶徒相似，其实味不同。所以然者何？水土异也。”	
The world's development is multi-dimensional, and its history is never a linear movement. China cannot copy the political system or development model of other countries, because it would not fit us and it might even lead to catastrophic consequences. The Chinese people, over 2,000 year ago, had come to understand this from a simple fact that the tasty orange, grown in southern China, would turn sour once it is grown in the north. The leaves may look the same, but the fruits taste quite different, because the north means different location and different climate.
有一个法国作家说，朋友看朋友是透明的，他们彼此交换生命。希望我的介绍能够让中国在你们眼前更透明一些。我也真诚希望，欧洲学院能够培养出大批了解中国、理解中国的人才，为中欧关系发展源源不断提供人才和智力支撑。	
A French writer once said that friends are transparent to friends because they exchange life. I hope what I just shared with you could draw for you a more transparent picture of China. I also sincerely hope that the College of Europe will produce a large number of talents who know and understand China well so as to provide a constant source of talent and intellectual support for the growth of China-Europe relations.
老师们、同学们！	
Faculty Members,
Students,
中国和欧洲虽然远隔万里，但都生活在同一个时间、同一个空间之内，生活息息相关。当前，中欧都处于发展的关键时期，都面临着前所未有的机遇和挑战。刚才，我说到我们希望同欧洲朋友一道，在亚欧大陆架起一座友谊和合作之桥。我们要共同努力建造和平、增长、改革、文明四座桥梁，建设更具全球影响力的中欧全面战略伙伴关系。	
China and Europe may seem far apart geographically, but we are in fact in the same time and the same space. I even feel that we are close to each other, as if in the same neighborhood. Both China and Europe are in a crucial stage of development and facing unprecedented opportunities and challenges. As I just said, we hope to work with our European friends to build a bridge of friendship and cooperation across the Eurasian continent. For that, we need to build four bridges for peace, growth, reform and progress of civilization, so that the China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership will take on even greater global significance.
——我们要建设和平稳定之桥，把中欧两大力量连接起来。中国和欧盟面积占世界十分之一，人口占世界四分之一，在联合国安理会拥有3个常任理事国席位。要和平不要战争、要多边不要单边、要对话不要对抗是双方的共识。我们要加强在全球性问题上的沟通和协调，为维护世界和平稳定发挥关键性作用。文明文化可以传播，和平发展也可以传播。中国愿意同欧盟一道，让和平的阳光驱走战争的阴霾，让繁荣的篝火温暖世界经济的春寒，促进全人类走上和平发展、合作共赢的道路。	
We need to build a bridge of peace and stability linking the two strong forces of China and the EU. China and the EU take up one tenth of the total area on Earth and one fourth of the world's population. Together, we take three permanent seats on the Security Council of the United Nations. We all need peace, multilateralism and dialogue, instead of war, unilateralism and confrontation. We need to enhance communication and coordination on global issues and play a key role in safeguarding world peace and stability. Civilization and culture can spread, so can peace and development. China stands ready to work with the EU to let the sunlight of peace drive away the shadow of war and the bonfire of prosperity warm up the global economy in the cold early spring, and enable the whole mankind to embark on the path of peaceful development and win-win cooperation.
——我们要建设增长繁荣之桥，把中欧两大市场连接起来。中国和欧盟经济总量占世界三分之一，是世界最重要的两大经济体。我们要共同坚持市场开放，加快投资协定谈判，积极探讨自由贸易区建设，努力实现到2020年双方贸易额达到10000亿美元的宏伟目标。我们还要积极探讨把中欧合作和丝绸之路经济带建设结合起来，以构建亚欧大市场为目标，让亚欧两大洲人员、企业、资金、技术活起来、火起来，使中国和欧盟成为世界经济增长的双引擎。	
We need to build a bridge of growth and prosperity linking the two big markets of China and the EU. China and the EU are the two most important major economies in the world with our combined economy accounting for one third of the global economy. We must uphold open market, speed up negotiations on the investment agreement, actively explore the possibility of a free trade area, and strive to achieve the ambitious goal of bringing two-way trade to one trillion US dollars by 2020. We should also study how to dovetail China-EU cooperation with the initiative of developing the Silk Road economic belt so as to integrate the markets of Asia and Europe, energize the people, businesses, capital and technologies of Asia and Europe, and make China and the EU the twin engines for global economic growth.
——我们要建设改革进步之桥，把中欧两大改革进程连接起来。中国和欧盟都在经历人类历史上前所未有的改革进程，都在走前人没有走过的路。双方要加强在宏观经济、公共政策、区域发展、农村发展、社会民生等领域对话和合作，尊重双方的改革道路，借鉴双方的改革经验，以自身改革带动世界发展进步。	
We need to build a bridge of reform and progress linking the reform processes in China and the EU. Both China and the EU are pursuing reforms that are unprecedented in human history, and both are sailing uncharted waters. We may enhance dialogue and cooperation on macro-economy, public policy, regional development, rural development, social welfare and other fields. We need to respect each other's path of reform and draw upon each other's reform experience. And we need to promote world development and progress through our reform efforts.
——我们要建设文明共荣之桥，把中欧两大文明连接起来。中国是东方文明的重要代表，欧洲则是西方文明的发祥地。正如中国人喜欢茶而比利时人喜爱啤酒一样，茶的含蓄内敛和酒的热烈奔放代表了品味生命、解读世界的两种不同方式。但是，茶和酒并不是不可兼容的，既可以酒逢知己千杯少，也可以品茶品味品人生。中国主张“和而不同”，而欧盟强调“多元一体”。中欧要共同努力，促进人类各种文明之花竞相绽放。	
We need to build a bridge of common cultural prosperity linking the two major civilizations of China and Europe. China represents in an important way the Eastern civilization, while Europe is the birthplace of the Western civilization. The Chinese people are fond of tea and the Belgians love beer. To me, the moderate tea drinker and the passionate beer lover represent two ways of understanding life and knowing the world, and I find them equally rewarding. When good friends get together, they may want to drink to their heart's content to show their friendship. They may also choose to sit down quietly and drink tea while chatting about their life. In China, we value the idea of preserving "harmony without uniformity", and here in the EU people stress the need to be "united in diversity". Let us work together for all flowers of human civilizations to blossom together.
无论国际风云如何变幻，中国始终支持欧洲一体化进程，始终支持一个团结、稳定、繁荣的欧盟在国际事务中发挥更大作用。中国即将发表第二份对欧盟政策文件，重申中国对欧盟和发展中欧关系的高度重视。去年，中欧共同制定了中欧合作2020战略规划，在近百个领域提出了一系列具有雄心的合作目标。双方应该一道努力，尽早把蓝图变为现实，让未来10年的中欧关系更加美好。	
In spite of changes in the international landscape, China has always supported European integration and a bigger role in international affairs by a united, stable and prosperous EU. China will soon release its second EU policy paper to reiterate the high importance it places on the EU and on its relations with the EU. Last year, China and the EU jointly formulated the Strategic Agenda 2020 for China-EU Cooperation, setting out a host of ambitious goals for China-EU cooperation in nearly 100 areas. The two sides should work in concert to turn the blueprint into reality at an early date and strive for greater progress in China-EU relations in the coming decade.
老师们、同学们！	
Faculty Members,
Students,
近年来，欧洲学院日益重视中国，开设了欧中关系课程，还积极筹建欧中研究中心，致力于欧中关系研究。中方决定同欧洲学院共建中国在欧盟国家的第一个“中国馆”，提供1万册介绍中国历史、文化等各领域发展情况的图书和影视片用于学术研究。	
The College of Europe has, in recent years, placed increasing importance on China. It has opened courses on Europe-China relations. It is also busy preparing for the launch of a Europe-China research center devoted to studies of Europe-China relations. China has decided to work with the College of Europe to build a "Chinese Library", the first of its kind in an EU member country, and will provide, for the purpose of academic research, 10,000 books, videos and films on Chinese history, culture and the achievements China has made in various fields.
“读万卷书”，还要“行万里路”。建议同学们多到中国去看看。耳闻是虚，眼观为实。中国愿同欧方一道努力，争取到2020年实现中欧学生年度双向交流达到30万人次。	
As we Chinese believe, one needs to not only read 10,000 books, but also travel 10,000 miles to know the world around us. I suggest that you go to China more often to see for yourselves what China is like. What you hear from others might be false, but what you see with your own eyes is real. China intends to work with the EU to bring the number of students exchanged between the two sides to 300,000 each year by 2020.
青年最富有朝气、最富有梦想。中国的未来属于年轻一代，欧洲的未来属于年轻一代，世界的未来属于年轻一代。希望中欧双方的同学们用平等、尊重、爱心来看待这个世界，用欣赏、包容、互鉴的态度来看待世界上的不同文明，促进中国和欧洲人民的相互了解和理解，促进中国、欧洲同世界其他国家人民的相互了解和理解，用青春的活力和青春的奋斗，让我们生活的这个星球变得更加美好。	
Young people are always energetic and full of dreams. They are the future of China, Europe and, indeed, of the world. I hope that Chinese and European students will perceive the world with equality, respect and love and treat different civilizations with appreciation, inclusiveness and the spirit of mutual learning. This way, you will promote mutual understanding and knowledge among the people of China, Europe and other parts of the world, and with your youthful energy and hard work, make our planet a better place to live in.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
