117. 习近平在巴基斯坦议会的演讲
构建中巴命运共同体 开辟合作共赢新征程
——在巴基斯坦议会的演讲
（2015年4月21日，伊斯兰堡）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Building a China-Pakistan Community of Shared Destiny to Pursue Closer Win-Win Cooperation
Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the Parliament of Pakistan
Islamabad, 21 April 2015
尊敬的谢里夫总理，
尊敬的拉巴尼参议院主席，
尊敬的萨迪克国民议会议长，
各位部长，
各位议员朋友，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif,
Your Excellency Senate Chairman Mr. Raza Rabbani,
Your Excellency Speaker of the National Assembly Mr. Sardar Ayaz Sadiq,
Ministers,
Members of Parliament,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，有机会来到巴基斯坦议会同各位议员朋友面对面交流，我感到非常高兴。巴基斯坦议会邀请我发表演讲，充分表明了你们对中国人民的深情厚谊，我对此表示衷心的感谢！
I am very pleased to come to the Parliament of Pakistan today to address you, members of the Parliament of Pakistan. The Parliament of Pakistan's invitation to me to address you today fully testifies to the profound friendship you cherish towards the Chinese people. Thank you very much for your kind invitation.
首先，我代表13亿多中国人民，向兄弟的巴基斯坦人民，致以最诚挚的问候和最美好的祝愿！借此机会，我要向长期以来为中巴两国友谊和合作作出贡献的各界朋友，致以崇高的敬意！	
First of all, I wish to convey, on behalf of the 1.3 billion and more Chinese people, our warmest greetings and best wishes to the brotherly people of Pakistan. I also take this opportunity to pay deep respect to all the Pakistani friends in various fields of endeavor who have over the years worked to promote friendship and cooperation between Pakistan and China.
巴基斯坦是我今年出访的第一站。这虽然是我第一次来到巴基斯坦，但我对巴基斯坦一点也不陌生。中国有句古话：“与君初相识，犹如故人归。”这就是我访问巴基斯坦的真实感受。我年轻时经常听到老一辈人讲述巴基斯坦的风土人情和中巴友谊的感人故事，早就对巴基斯坦心驰神往。一踏上这片美丽的土地，我和我的同事们就沉浸在热情友好的海洋之中，仿佛回到亲如手足的兄弟家中。	
Pakistan is the first foreign country I visit this year. Although this is my first visit to your country, Pakistan is not at all unfamiliar to me. As an old Chinese saying goes, "Meeting a good friend for the first time is like having a reunion with an old friend." This is exactly how I feel during my visit to Pakistan. When I was young, I heard a lot from the elder generation about life and scenery in Pakistan and the moving stories of friendship between China and Pakistan. So I have long been fascinated by Pakistan. The moment we arrived in your beautiful country, my colleagues and I have been overwhelmed by your warm hospitality. It is just like coming to the home of dear brothers.
中国和巴基斯坦的友谊是肝胆相照的信义之交，休戚与共的患难之交，堪称国与国友好相处的典范。巴基斯坦人民将中巴友谊比喻为“比山高，比海深，比蜜甜”。中国人民则亲切地称巴基斯坦人民为“好朋友、好邻居、好伙伴、好兄弟”。	
Friendship between China and Pakistan is based on trust and mutual support, and we have been devoted friends through both good and hard times. Our friendship is a pacesetter for amicable relations between countries. The Pakistani people say that China-Pakistan friendship is higher than the mountain, deeper than the sea and sweeter than honey. And we Chinese fondly refer to the Pakistani people as our good friends, good neighbors, good partners, and good brothers.
这次访问期间，我同侯赛因总统、谢里夫总理一致同意将中巴关系提升为全天候战略合作伙伴关系。全天候就是风雨无阻、永远同行的意思。这一定位是中巴全天候友谊和全方位合作的鲜明写照，可谓实至名归。	
During my current visit, President Hussain, Prime Minister Sharif and I agreed to elevate China-Pakistan relations to an all-weather strategic cooperative partnership. By all-weather, we mean that our two countries will always move ahead together rain or shine. This description of China-Pakistan partnership is a most appropriate one, as it aptly defines the all-weather friendship and all-round cooperation between China and Pakistan.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
巴基斯坦是一个年轻而又古老的伟大国家。这片热土孕育了辉煌灿烂的古代文明，在近代史上书写了争取民族独立、国家自强的壮丽诗篇。巴基斯坦人民善良勇敢、自尊自信，有着百折不挠、坚韧不拔的民族气质。建国60多年来，巴基斯坦政府和人民面对复杂的国内外形势，沉着应对各种严峻挑战，在捍卫国家主权独立和领土完整、建设国家和发展经济的道路上取得了显著成就。进入新世纪以来，巴基斯坦身处国际反恐前沿，付出了巨大努力，承受了巨大牺牲，为地区乃至世界和平稳定作出了突出贡献。中国人民对巴基斯坦人民充满深深的敬意。	
Pakistan is a great country, both ancient and young. It is home to a splendid ancient civilization. In modern times, Pakistan fought unremittingly to win independence and pursue national development. The Pakistanis are a kind, brave, dignified and confident people with an indomitable national character. Over the past 60 years and more since the founding of the country, the Pakistani government and people have, in the face of intricate domestic and international developments, risen up to various challenges and made remarkable achievements in upholding sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity as well as in national and economic development. In the new century, Pakistan has stood at the frontline of international fight against terrorism. It has made tremendous efforts, endured enormous sacrifice, and made outstanding contribution to upholding peace and stability of our region and the world. We in China have great admiration for the people of Pakistan.
巴基斯坦国父真纳说过：“我们不辞赴汤蹈火，因为相信阳光未来。”未来可以期待，未来也可以创造。当前，巴基斯坦面临着历史性发展机遇。谢里夫总理提出了“亚洲之虎”的梦想，为巴基斯坦勾画出宏伟蓝图。中国人民相信，巴基斯坦人民团结一心、不懈努力，一定能够在国家建设征程中创造新的奇迹、铸就新的辉煌。中国人民将始终同巴基斯坦人民站在一起！	
The founding father of Pakistan Muhammad Ali Jinnah said that "We are not afraid of the deep sea or the fire, because we believe in the sun and the future." The future is something that you either expect or shape. Today, Pakistan has a historic development opportunity. Prime Minister Sharif has crafted the vision of the "Asian Tiger Dream", outlining a great blueprint for Pakistan. The Chinese people are confident that the Pakistani people, united as one in making unremitting efforts, will surely make even greater progress in pursuing national development. The Chinese people will always stand together with the Pakistani people in your great endeavor.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
早在2000多年前，丝绸之路就在我们两个古老文明之间架起了友谊的桥梁。中国汉代使节张骞、东晋高僧法显、唐代高僧玄奘的足迹都曾经到过这里。巴基斯坦认为“诚信比财富更有用”，中国认为“人而无信，不知其可也”，两国传统文化理念契合相通。在近代，中巴曾经遭受帝国主义、殖民主义的侵略和压迫，彼此同情，相互支持。早在上世纪30年代，巴基斯坦伟大诗人伊克巴尔就写下了“沉睡的中国人民正在觉醒，喜马拉雅山的山泉已经开始沸腾”的诗句，赞扬和声援中国人民争取民族独立、反抗外来侵略的斗争。相似的历史遭遇，共同的斗争历程，使中巴人民心灵相通。	
Over 2,000 years ago, the Silk Road became a bridge of friendship linking our two ancient civilizations. Zhang Qian, China's emissary in the Han Dynasty, Faxian, the master monk in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and Xuan Zang, the great monk in the Tang Dynasty visited Pakistan. Our two countries share similar cultural traditions and values. The Pakistanis believe that good faith is more precious than wealth. And we Chinese believe that a person cannot do without credibility. In recent history, both China and Pakistan suffered from imperialist and colonialist aggression and oppression and we extended mutual sympathy and support to each other. Back in the 1930s, the great Pakistani poet Muhammad Iqbal wrote that the Chinese people are waking up from their sleep and the spring of Mount Himalaya is bursting. Those lines saluted and voiced support to the Chinese people in their struggle for independence and fight against foreign aggression. Similar historical sufferings and the common struggle have brought our hearts and minds together.
建交以来，在两国历代领导人关心和培育下，在两国各界人士共同努力下，中巴建立了全天候友谊，开展了全方位合作。无论国际风云和两国国内局势如何变化，两国在涉及彼此核心利益问题上一贯相互理解、相互支持。这份情谊堪称独一无二。	
Since the establishment of diplomatic ties, thanks to the commitment of successive Chinese and Pakistani leaders and the concerted efforts of our two peoples, our two countries have forged an all-weather friendship and pursued all-round cooperation. Despite changes in the domestic and international environment, we have always extended sympathy to and supported each other on issues crucial to our respective core interests. Such friendship is truly unique.
“疾风知劲草，烈火见真金。”我们不会忘记，巴基斯坦是最早承认新中国的国家之一，也是首个同新中国建立外交关系的伊斯兰国家。在新中国打破外部封锁、恢复在联合国合法席位、探索改革开放等关键时刻，巴基斯坦总是挺身而出，给予我们无私而宝贵的帮助。在中国遇到自然灾害和困难挑战的时候，巴基斯坦总是及时伸出援手。2008年中国汶川发生特大地震，巴基斯坦倾囊相助，出动所有的战略运输机，将全部战略储备帐篷第一时间运到了灾区。随行医疗队为节省飞机空间，拆掉了飞机上的座椅，一路上席地而坐。今天，数以千计的巴基斯坦工作人员在各地同中国职工一起夜以继日建设中国承担的项目，涌现出许多感人肺腑的故事。	
As a Chinese saying goes, "Strong wind reveals the strength of grass, and genuine gold stands the test of fire." We will never forget that Pakistan was one of the first countries to recognize New China and the first Islamic country to enter into diplomatic relations with China. At the critical times when New China endeavored to break the blockade, resume its lawful seat at the United Nations and explore ways to carry out reform and opening-up, Pakistan always came forward with selfless and valuable assistance. When China was hit by natural disasters or faced difficulties, Pakistan always extended a helping hand. In 2008, when the devastating earthquake struck Wenchuan, China, Pakistan responded immediately and sent all its transport aircraft to ship its entire reserve of tents to China. The Pakistani medical team on the transport plane had to remove all seats to make room for the tents and sat on the floor all the way to China. Today, thousands of Pakistanis are working side by side with Chinese engineers and workers on projects undertaken by China in Pakistan, and there are many moving stories about their cooperation.
同样，在巴基斯坦需要的时候，中国始终是巴方的坚强后盾。中国坚定支持巴基斯坦维护主权独立和领土完整的努力。2010年巴基斯坦遭受特大洪灾，中国第一时间伸出援手，陆空全方位施援，派出历史上最大规模的医疗救援队，首次派遣大规模车队和直升机执行救援任务，开创了中国对外援助史上的先河。2014年底，白沙瓦恐怖袭击事件发生后，中方专门邀请巴方受伤学生和家人赴华疗养，让孩子们幼小的心灵感受到中国人民真挚的情谊。	
Similarly, whenever Pakistan is in need, China has come to its help. China firmly supports Pakistan's efforts to uphold sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. When Pakistan was hit by a severe flood in 2010, China provided immediate relief assistance via air and land routes. We dispatched the largest ever medical team and sent a big convoy of vehicles and helicopters to carry out rescue operations, the first time that such an operation was undertaken in the history of China's rescue assistance. Following the terrorist attack in Peshawar at the end of 2014, China invited the students who had been injured in the attack and their family to spend some time in China for recuperation, so the trauma those kids had experienced could be healed with care and love of the Chinese people.
在不久前的也门撤侨行动中，中国军舰搭载176名巴基斯坦公民从亚丁港撤离，巴基斯坦军舰协助从穆卡拉港撤离8名中国留学生。巴方军舰指挥官下达命令：“只要中国留学生不到，我们的军舰就不离港。”这掷地有声的话语再次证明中巴友谊情比海深。
In the most recent evacuation mission in Yemen, the Chinese navy evacuated 176 Pakistanis from the Port of Aden, and the Pakistani navy evacuated eight Chinese students from Mukalla Port. The Pakistani commander gave the order that the ship would not leave until all the Chinese students were on board. His stirring words again show that China-Pakistan friendship is indeed deeper than the sea.
中国前驻巴基斯坦大使、也是我的老领导耿飚先生曾经说过：“中巴传统友谊必然像喀喇昆仑公路一样越走越宽广。”今天，中巴关系发展印证了他的预言。患难见真情，中国和巴基斯坦都越来越深切地感受到善邻的珍贵、朋友的温暖。	
Former Chinese Ambassador to Pakistan, Geng Biao, whom I once worked for, said that the traditional friendship between China and Pakistan will spread far and wide, just like the Karakoram Highway. His forecast has proved true by the thriving China-Pakistan relationship we see today. Having gone through weal and woe together, we couldn't feel more gratified to have each other as great neighbor and friend.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，中巴两国都肩负着民族振兴的历史重任，致力于强国富民的伟大梦想。我们比以往任何时候都更需要紧密携手合作，发挥两国传统友好优势、地缘毗邻优势、经济互补优势，共享机遇，共迎挑战，共谋发展，不断充实中巴命运共同体的内涵，更好造福两国人民，促进地区稳定和繁荣、为打造亚洲命运共同体发挥示范作用。	
Today, China and Pakistan both shoulder the historic mission of achieving national renewal and realizing the great dream of building a strong country and delivering a better life for our peoples. More than ever, we need to work together to strengthen the traditional friendship, fully leverage on geographic proximity and economic complementarity to share opportunities, meet challenges head on, pursue common development and substantiate the China-Pakistan community of shared destiny. This will enable us to create greater benefits to the Chinese and Pakistani peoples, contribute to stability and prosperity of our region and lead the way in building a community of common destiny in Asia.
第一，中巴要守望相助，深化战略合作。中国和巴基斯坦同为发展中国家，对内走独立自主、自力更生的道路，对外坚持和平外交政策。中巴关系的最大特点是高度政治互信，凡事为对方着想，始终站在对方的角度思考问题。我们要保持两国高层经常互访和会晤的传统。两国领导人要像走亲戚一样常来常往，就重大战略性问题加强合作，引领中巴关系不断向前发展。我们要在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互支持，坚定维护国家主权、领土完整、民族尊严，做最可靠的伙伴。	
First, we should strengthen mutual assistance and deepen strategic cooperation. Both being developing countries, we pursue an independent path of development at home and a foreign policy of peace. A defining feature of our relations is deep political trust, which means we always put ourselves in each other's position in addressing related issues. We should keep the good tradition of frequent high-level visits and meetings. As leaders, we should meet often just as family members, and work together on major strategic issues to grow China-Pakistan relationship. We should support each other on issues involving our respective core interests and major concerns, firmly uphold sovereignty, territorial integrity and national dignity, and be each other's most dependable partner.
第二，中巴要弘义融利，实现共同发展。中华文化倡导“己欲立而立人，己欲达而达人”。中国坚持正确义利观，帮助巴基斯坦就是帮助我们自己。中巴经济走廊是中巴实现共同发展的重要抓手。我们要发挥走廊建设对两国务实合作的引领作用，以走廊建设为中心，以瓜达尔港、能源、基础设施建设、产业合作为重点，形成“1+4”合作布局。走廊规划和布局要兼顾巴基斯坦各地区，让发展成果惠及巴基斯坦全体人民，进而惠及本地区各国人民。	
Second, we should advance our shared interests and achieve common development. The Chinese culture believes that to achieve success, one should let others succeed as well. China champions a right approach to principles and interests. We believe that to help Pakistan is to help ourselves. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is a focal point of our joint efforts to achieve common development, and we should use this economic corridor to drive our practical cooperation with focus on Gwadar Port, energy, infrastructure development and industrial cooperation. The planning and layout of the Economic Corridor should cover other parts of Pakistan as well so that the fruits of its development will reach both all the people in Pakistan and the people of other countries in our region.
昨天，我们双方签署了数十项合作协议，相信这些协议将有力推动中巴务实合作，特别是推动中巴经济走廊建设取得实质性进展。为支持巴基斯坦发展经济、改善民生，中方决定向巴方提供无偿援助，用于联邦直辖部落区重建和巴方关切的民生项目。	
Yesterday, several dozen cooperation agreements were signed between the two sides. I am convinced that these agreements will boost our practical cooperation, and lead to substantive progress in the development of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. To support economic development and improve people's wellbeing in Pakistan, China will provide free assistance to Pakistan for reconstruction in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and for undertaking projects for the improvement of people's livelihood that are important to Pakistan.
第三，中巴要心心相印，坚持世代友好。人民是推动国家进步和历史发展的决定力量，两国人民支持是中巴全天候友谊和全方位合作的不竭动力。2015年是中巴友好交流年，我们要以友城交流、文化中心、新闻媒体为平台，开展形式多样、内容丰富的庆祝活动。我们要延续互派百人青年团的传统，鼓励两国青年一代多来往、多交流。中国将在未来5年内为巴方提供2000个培训名额，并帮助巴方培训1000名汉语教师。我们欢迎巴方积极参与中国－南亚人文交流计划，让中巴友好更加深入人心。	
Third, we should enhance close exchanges to build lasting friendship. It is the people who advance progress of nations and history. The support of our peoples is the inexhaustible source of force fostering China-Pakistan all-weather friendship and all-round cooperation. This year is the Year of China-Pakistan Friendly Exchanges. We should use the platforms of sister cities, cultural centers and media organizations to conduct diverse and colorful events of celebration. We should continue to send 100-member youth groups to visit each other's country and encourage more contacts and exchanges between young Chinese and Pakistanis. In the next five years, China will provide 2,000 training opportunities for Pakistan and train 1,000 Chinese language teachers for Pakistan. We welcome Pakistan's participation in the program of people-to-people and cultural exchanges between China and South Asia to strengthen popular support for China-Pakistan friendship.
第四，中巴要风雨同舟，共对安全挑战。中巴两国安全利益休戚相关。长期以来，巴方克服种种困难，为中国西部边陲安全稳定作出了重要贡献，我们对此铭记于心。中方将帮助巴方加强反恐和安全能力建设，同巴方加强配合，共同应对日益增多的非传统安全威胁，为两国经济合作和共同发展提供可靠的安全保障。	
Fourth, we should stick together in face of difficulty and jointly meet security challenges. Our two countries share a common stake in security. Over the years, Pakistan has overcome all difficulties and contributed greatly to the security and stability of China's western border areas, and this is something we will never forget. China will assist Pakistan in strengthening its capacity for fighting terrorism and ensuring security, and work with Pakistan to tackle rising non-traditional security threats so as to provide a reliable security guarantee for bilateral economic cooperation and common development.
第五，中巴要勇担责任，加强国际协作。中巴关系远远超出了双边范畴。双方要就国际和地区形势保持战略沟通，在重大全球和地区问题上加强协调和配合。中方支持巴方在阿富汗问题上发挥建设性作用，愿同巴方一道推动阿富汗和解进程，支持阿富汗平稳过渡。今年是联合国成立和世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年，我们要重申对联合国宪章宗旨和原则的坚定承诺，共同推动构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系。	
Fifth, we should fulfill our due responsibilities and increase coordination on international issues. China-Pakistan relations have gone well beyond the bilateral context. We should maintain strategic communication on regional and international developments and increase coordination and collaboration on major regional and global issues. China supports Pakistan in playing a constructive role on the Afghan issue and will work with Pakistan to advance the reconciliation process and smooth transition in Afghanistan. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the victory of the world's anti-fascist war. We should reaffirm our abiding commitment to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and work together to build a new type of international relations of win-win cooperation.
不论国际风云如何变幻，中国将始终从战略高度和长远角度看待中巴关系，将巴基斯坦置于中国外交优先位置。巴基斯坦有一句谚语：“风，不是总朝着海员希望的方向吹。”我要说，只要我们的心总是朝着两国人民希望的方向想，劲总是朝着两国人民希望的方向使，就一定能够战胜前进道路上的一切艰难险阻，中巴全天候战略合作伙伴关系将会领域更宽广、层次更丰富、内涵更充实。	
No matter how the international landscape may change, China will always approach its relations with Pakistan from a strategic and long-term perspective and give Pakistan high priority on its diplomatic agenda. There is a saying in Pakistan that the wind does not always blow in the direction which the sailor wishes. Yes, that is true. But as long as we are guided by the aspirations of our people and strive to meet such aspirations, we will be able to surmount all the obstacles on the way, and China-Pakistan all-weather strategic cooperative partnership will be further strengthened and enriched.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当前，中国正处在全面建成小康社会决定性阶段。中国与世界的互动和利益融合更加紧密，中国将同包括巴基斯坦在内的发展伙伴加强合作，为地区和全球经济增长作出新的更大贡献。	
China has reached the crucial stage of building a society of initial prosperity in all respects. As China and its interests are increasingly integrated with the world, we will enhance cooperation with Pakistan and all other development partners to contribute more to the economic growth in both our region and the world.
中华民族历来爱好和平。中国人在两千多年前就认识到“国虽大，好战必亡”的道理。中国人民崇尚“己所不欲，勿施于人”，中国不认同“国强必霸论”。走和平发展道路，对中国有利，对亚洲有利，对世界也有利，任何力量都不能动摇中国和平发展的信念。中国坚持不干涉别国内政原则，不会把自己的意志强加于人，即使再强大也永远不称霸。	
The Chinese nation loves peace. Over 2,000 years ago, the Chinese already knew that a belligerent country, however big it may be, is doomed. "Do not do onto others what you do not want others to do onto you." This is a principle that we Chinese adhere to, and we do not subscribe to the belief that a country is bound to seek hegemony when it becomes powerful. Peaceful development is in China's interests, and also in the interests of Asia and the world. Nothing can shake our resolve to pursue peaceful development. China is committed to the principle of non-interference in other's internal affairs; it will never impose its own will onto others; and China will never seek hegemony however strong it may become.
中国将坚持合作共赢的理念，坚定不移发展同世界各国的友好合作，坚持按照亲诚惠容的理念，深化同周边国家的互利合作，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家，永远做发展中国家的可靠朋友和真诚伙伴。中国将坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略，全面推进对外开放，发展开放型经济体系，努力为亚洲和世界发展带来新的机遇和空间。	
China will continue to pursue win-win cooperation and enhance friendship and cooperation with other countries. It will stay committed to the policy of affinity, sincerity, mutual-benefit and inclusiveness. It will deepen win-win cooperation with its neighbors so as to deliver more benefits to them through its own development. China will remain a reliable friend and sincere partner of other developing countries. China will continue to pursue a win-win strategy for opening-up, and advance all-round opening-up to build an open economy. This will create new development opportunities and space to both Asia and the world.
中国提出建设丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路倡议，是在新形势下扩大全方位开放的重要举措，也是要致力于使更多国家共享发展机遇和成果。我们希望同“一带一路”沿线国家加强合作，实现道路联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、政策沟通、民心相通，共同打造开放合作平台，为地区可持续发展提供新动力。	
The initiative of building a Silk Road Economic Belt and a 21st Century Maritime Silk Road (the Belt and Road Initiative) that China has launched is a significant move to fully open up itself under the new conditions. This initiative also reflects China's commitment to sharing development opportunities and outcomes with more countries. We will strengthen cooperation with countries along the land and maritime Silk Roads and realize the connectivity of roads, trade, finance, policies and our peoples, so as to jointly build an open platform for cooperation and create new impetus to achieve sustainable development in the related regions.
南亚地处“一带一路”海陆交汇之处，是推进“一带一路”建设的重要方向和合作伙伴。中巴经济走廊和孟中印缅经济走廊与“一带一路”关联紧密，进展顺利。两大走廊建设将有力促进有关国家经济增长，并为深化南亚区域合作提供新的强大动力。	
South Asia is where the land and maritime Silk Roads meet. It is therefore a focal area and important cooperation partner for advancing the Belt and Road Initiative. Good progress has been made in building the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Economic Corridor which are closely connected with the land and maritime Silk Roads. The building of these two economic corridors will give a strong boost to the economic growth of the related countries and provide a strong new force for deepening regional cooperation in South Asia.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
和平、发展、合作是我们这个伟大时代的主题。广阔富饶的南亚地区蕴含着无限发展生机，勤劳智慧的南亚人民正在奋力开拓地区发展新局面，打造世界经济新的增长极。	
Peace, development and cooperation are the theme of our great times. The vast and richly endowed South Asia has boundless potential for development. The hard-working and talented people of South Asia are making vigorous efforts to speed up development in the region and turn it into a new pole of growth for the world economy.
中国是南亚最大的邻国。一个和平稳定、发展繁荣的南亚符合中国利益。中国愿同南亚国家的发展战略有效对接，实现互利发展，共同繁荣。我去年访问南亚三国期间，提出了加强中国同南亚合作的一系列倡议，目前正在稳步落实之中。中方尊重南亚地区的独特文化和历史传统，愿做南亚国家的真诚伙伴，同地区国家相互尊重、平等相待，照顾彼此舒适度，确保双方关系长期健康发展。	
China is the biggest neighbor of South Asia. A peaceful and stable South Asia that enjoys development and prosperity serves China's interests. China is ready to pursue its development strategy with that of the South Asian countries in mind to realize mutually beneficial development and common prosperity. During my visit to three South Asian countries last year, I put forward a number of initiatives to strengthen China's cooperation with the South Asian countries, which are being implemented. China respects the unique culture and historical traditions of the South Asian region. We are a sincere partner of South Asian countries. We will treat each other with respect and as equals, and accommodate each other's comfort level to ensure long-term and sound growth of our relations.
只有相互合作、互利共赢，才能做大共同利益蛋糕，走向共同繁荣。我们愿将南亚作为向西开放的重点地区，同南亚各国加强发展经验互鉴，推动发展优势互补。中方愿在南南合作框架内，对南亚国家提供力所能及的帮助和支持。	
Only with win-win cooperation can we enlarge the pie of common interests and realize common prosperity. South Asia occupies a priority on China's westward opening-up agenda, and we will share more development practices with the South Asian countries to complement each other's development endeavors. China is ready to do more to provide assistance and support to South Asian countries within the framework of South-South cooperation.
中国和南亚国家都拥有悠久历史，都崇尚向善友爱、包容互鉴、和谐共生。作为亚洲文明对话的重要组成部分，中国愿同南亚国家加强文明对话，共同传播东方智慧，弘扬亚洲价值。	
Both China and the South Asian countries have a time-honored history, and we both value benevolence, friendship, inclusiveness, mutual learning, harmony and co-existence. China is ready to strengthen inter-civilization dialogue with South Asian countries, an important part of such dialogue across Asia, so as to jointly promote the wisdom of the East and Asian values.
开放包容、联合自强，是亚洲国家实现发展繁荣和民族振兴的成功经验，也是今后实现更大发展的必由之路。中国愿同南亚国家加强合作，一道推进南亚和亚洲区域合作进程。中国愿提升同南盟合作水平，同南亚国家在多边框架内加强国际协作，共同维护广大发展中国家利益。	
It is thanks to openness, inclusiveness, unity and self-reliance that the Asian countries have succeeded in promoting development, prosperity and national renewal. We must continue to be guided by such visions to achieve even greater development in the future. China will strengthen cooperation with the South Asian countries to jointly advance regional cooperation in South Asia and Asia as a whole. China will upgrade its cooperation with the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, and step up international coordination with the South Asian countries under multilateral frameworks to jointly uphold the interests of developing countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
构建中巴命运共同体，是中巴两国政府和人民从两国根本利益出发作出的战略抉择。巴基斯坦国父真纳说：“只有通过团结一致的努力，才能把我们的理想变成现实。”让我们携起手来，共同开创两国更加美好的未来！	
To build a China-Pakistan community of shared destiny is a strategic decision made by our two governments and peoples. It meets the fundamental interests of our two countries. Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founding father of Pakistan, once observed that only through united efforts can we turn our ideals into reality. Let us work together to create an even brighter future for China and Pakistan.
谢谢大家！	
Thank you!
