6. 习近平在亚太经合组织工商领导人对话会上的主旨演讲
构建新发展格局　实现互利共赢
Fostering a New Development Paradigm and
Pursuing Mutual Benefit and Win-win Cooperation
——在亚太经合组织工商领导人对话会上的主旨演讲
（2020年11月19日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Address by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the APEC CEO Dialogues
19 November 2020
各位工商界朋友，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Leaders of the Business Community,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
在全球共抗新冠肺炎疫情、探索世界经济复苏道路的重要时刻，很高兴通过视频方式同大家见面。
At a critical time when the world is fighting COVID-19 and exploring ways to achieve economic recovery, I am glad to have this dialogue with you through video links.
人类正处在一个特殊的历史时期。新冠肺炎疫情全球大流行，推动世界百年未有之大变局加速演进。世界经济深度衰退，全球产业链、供应链遭受冲击，治理赤字、信任赤字、发展赤字、和平赤字仍在扩大。单边主义、保护主义、霸凌行径上升，经济全球化遭遇逆流，加剧了世界经济中的风险和不确定性。
This is an unusual time in history for us humanity. The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated changes unseen in a century in the world. The global economy finds itself into deep recession, its industrial and supply chains are disrupted, and governance, trust, development and peace deficits continue to grow. Mounting unilateralism, protectionism and bullying as well as backlash against economic globalization have added to risks and uncertainties in the world economy.
与此同时，和平与发展的时代主题没有改变，合作应对挑战是国际社会唯一选择。这场疫情再次说明，人类命运休戚与共，各国利益紧密相连，世界是不可分割的命运共同体。无论是赢得全球抗疫最终胜利，还是推动世界经济复苏，国际社会必须团结协作，共同应对危机考验。各国要守望相助、同舟共济，弘扬伙伴精神，密切政策沟通和协调，全面深化抗疫国际合作，坚持建设开放型世界经济，争取尽早战胜疫情，努力实现世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。
However, peace and development remain the underlying trend of our times. Meeting challenges through cooperation is the only way forward for us in the international community. This pandemic once again shows that the interests of all countries are closely interwoven and that humankind shares a common stake. Indeed, our world is an indivisible community with a shared future. To beat the virus and promote global recovery, we in the international community must close ranks and jointly respond to this crisis and meet the test. All countries should act in the spirit of partnership and get through this tough time together. We need to step up policy communication and coordination, intensify all-round global cooperation against COVID-19 and keep global economy open. By doing so, we can defeat the virus at an early date and achieve robust, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth for all.
今年以来，面对突如其来的疫情，中国坚持人民至上、生命至上，14亿人民上下一心，全国抗疫斗争取得重大战略成果。我们统筹疫情防控和经济社会发展工作，抓紧恢复生产生活秩序。前三季度，中国经济增长实现由负转正。这一成果来之不易，充分展现了中国经济的强大韧性和旺盛活力。中国经济发展稳中向好、长期向好的基本面没有变，我们完全有信心、有能力保持经济平稳运行，如期实现全面建成小康社会、打赢脱贫攻坚战的目标。
Since the start of this year, facing the sudden onslaught of COVID-19, China has put people and life above everything else. The 1.4 billion Chinese people, united as one, have made a major strategic achievement in fighting the virus. We have endeavored to both contain the virus and speedily bring production and life back to normal, thus maintaining economic and social development. China’s economy resumed positive overall growth in the first three quarters this year. This hard-won achievement speaks volumes about the resilience and vitality of the Chinese economy. The fundamentals sustaining China’s steady and long-term economic growth remain unchanged. We have full confidence and ability to maintain stable economic performance and achieve the goals of finishing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and eradicating poverty within the set time frame.
不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。我们提出构建新发展格局，是立足中国自身发展阶段和发展条件，充分考虑经济全球化和外部环境变化所作出的战略抉择。
At its recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee, the Communist Party of China deliberated on and adopted the recommendations for formulating China’s 14th Five-Year Plan. According to the recommendations, China will complete building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame. From next year on, China will embark on a new journey toward fully building a modern socialist country. We will develop a full understanding of the new development stage, and apply the new development philosophy. We will foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. The new development paradigm is a strategic decision we have made based on the current stage and conditions of development in China and with full consideration given to economic globalization and changes in the external environment.
第一，我们将扭住扩大内需战略基点，畅通国民经济循环。近年来，中国市场和资源两头在外的发展模式已经悄然改变，外贸依存度由2006年的67%下降到2019年的近32%，经常项目顺差同国内生产总值比率由2007年的9.9%降至现在的不到1%。2008年国际金融危机发生以来，中国国内需求对经济增长的贡献率有7个年份超过100%，国内消费成为经济增长的主要动力。在推动经济双循环过程中，中国经济自主性和发展质量显著提升，构建新发展格局顺应了中国经济结构调整、推动高质量发展的内在需要。我们将继续深化供给侧结构性改革，在扩大内需上下更大功夫，使生产、分配、流通、消费更多依托国内市场，增强供给体系对国内需求的适配性，形成需求牵引供给、供给创造需求的更高水平动态平衡。
First, we will expand domestic demand as a strategic priority and ensure smooth flow of economic activity. In recent years, China’s development model of reliance on foreign markets and resources has gone through some gradual changes. The ratio of foreign trade to GDP dropped from 67 percent in 2006 to less than 32 percent in 2019, while the ratio of current account surplus to GDP has come down from 9.9 percent in 2007 to less than one percent today. In seven years since the 2008 global financial crisis, the contribution of China’s domestic demand to GDP exceeded 100 percent, making domestic consumption the main driver of its growth. In promoting domestic and international circulations, the Chinese economy has become much more domestically driven and the performance of China’s development has been significantly enhanced. Fostering a new development paradigm will enable China to better adjust its economic structure and achieve high-quality development. China will continue to deepen supply-side structural reforms and further expand domestic demand. Doing so will make production, distribution, flow of goods and services, and consumption in China more based on domestic market, and it will make the supply system better adapt to domestic demand. This will usher in a higher stage of well-adjusted balance where demand drives supply and supply, in turn, creates demand.
第二，我们将大力推动科技创新，打造经济发展新动能。当前，新一轮科技革命和产业变革加速发展，科技对提高社会生产力的贡献更加凸显。中国坚持把创新作为引领发展的第一动力，推进创新驱动发展战略，取得显著成就。随着中国进入新发展阶段，支撑发展的要素条件发生了深刻变化，必须实现依靠创新驱动的内涵型增长。我们将依托超大规模市场优势和完备产业体系，加速科技成果向现实生产力转化，打造科技、教育、产业、金融紧密融合的创新体系，不断提升产业链水平，为中国经济长远发展提供有力支撑。
Second, we will vigorously make scientific and technological innovations to foster new growth drivers. A new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation is gathering pace, and science and technology are playing an even more significant role in boosting social productivity. To China, innovation has always been the primary driver of development, and we have made major achievements by implementing an innovation-driven development strategy. As China enters a new stage of development, factors of production underpinning its development have gone through profound changes. This means that China must pursue innovation to achieve high-quality growth driven by domestic demand. We will fully leverage the demand of our super-sized domestic market and the strengths of its complete industrial system and redouble efforts to turn research outcomes into real productivity. We will endeavor to build an innovation system that integrates science and technology, education, industries and the financial sector, and upgrade the industrial chains. This will sustain China’s long-term economic development.
第三，我们将持续深化改革，充分激发市场活力。中国改革开放40多年的实践表明，改革是解放和发展社会生产力的关键。随着中国进入新发展阶段，改革也面临新任务，我们将拿出更大勇气、更多举措破除深层次体制机制障碍，推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化。我们将不断提高贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享新发展理念的能力和水平，转变发展方式，推动质量变革、效率变革、动力变革，加快现代化经济体系建设，加强产权和知识产权保护，建设高标准市场体系，完善公平竞争制度，让各类市场主体活力充分涌流。
Third, we will continue to deepen reform and energize the market. What we have achieved during the past 40-plus years of China’s reform and opening-up shows one thing: Reform is crucial for unleashing and boosting productivity. China has entered a new stage of development and faces new tasks of reform. We will take more steps and remove with greater resolve deep-seated systemic and institutional barriers to modernize China’s governance system and capacity. We will enhance our ability to better apply the new development philosophy, namely, one of pursuing innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. We will transform the growth model, upgrade quality and performance, and make growth drivers more robust. We will accelerate the building of a modernized economy, strengthen protection of property and intellectual property rights, set up a high-standard market system and improve mechanisms for fair competition. All this will fully motivate all types of market entities.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
开放是国家进步的前提，封闭必然导致落后。当今世界，经济全球化潮流不可逆转，任何国家都无法关起门来搞建设，中国也早已同世界经济和国际体系深度融合。我们绝不会走历史回头路，不会谋求“脱钩”或是搞封闭排他的“小圈子”。我们构建新发展格局，绝不是封闭的国内单循环，而是开放的、相互促进的国内国际双循环。
Openness enables a country to move forward, while seclusion holds it back. In today’s world where economic globalization has become an irreversible trend, no country can develop itself by keeping its doors closed. China is already deeply integrated into the global economy and the international system. We will not reverse course or run against historical trend by “decoupling” or forming a small circle to keep others out. By fostering a new development paradigm, we are not pursuing a closed-door circulation, but open and mutually reinforcing domestic and international circulations.
——在新发展格局下，中国市场潜力将充分激发，为世界各国创造更多需求。中国人均国内生产总值已经突破1万美元，有超过4亿中等收入人口，许多国际机构预计今年中国商品零售市场规模将达到6万亿美元。中国经济的不断发展，中国人民对美好生活的追求，将对来自世界各地更加多样化高品质的产品、技术、服务产生更多需求。尽管受到疫情冲击，中国货物贸易进口规模已基本恢复到去年同期水平。今年9月，在北京举办中国国际服务贸易交易会，吸引了148个国家和地区的2.2万家企业和机构线上线下参展参会。不久前，第三届中国国际进口博览会在上海成功举行，来自124个国家和地区的企业参展，展览面积进一步扩大，成交额进一步提升，达到726.2亿美元。我们将进一步降低关税和制度性成本，培育一批进口贸易促进创新示范区，扩大对各国高质量产品和服务进口。相信随着中国市场潜力不断激发，将为各国提供更广阔的市场机会，为世界经济稳定发展提供更强劲动力。
— The new development paradigm will enable China to fully unlock its market potential and create greater demand for other countries. China’s per capita GDP has topped US$10,000, and its middle-income population has exceeded 400 million. It is projected by many international institutions that China’s retail market will reach six trillion dollars in size this year. As China’s economy grows, our people naturally want to lead an even better life. This will create more demand for a greater variety of quality products, technologies and services from across the world. Despite the damage inflicted by COVID-19, China’s import of goods has basically recovered to the level of last year. The China International Fair for Trade in Services held in Beijing this September brought together 22,000 companies from 148 countries and regions to its online and off line events. Not long ago, the third China International Import Expo was successfully held in Shanghai. It was participated by companies from 124 countries and regions. The exhibition area was further expanded. More deals were sealed, reaching US$72.62 billion in value. China will further cut tariffs and government instituted transaction costs, and open a number of demonstration zones for creative promotion of import trade to increase import of quality goods and services. I am confident that the steady unleashing of the China market potential will create vast business possibilities for other countries, and this will create stronger impetus for maintaining stable growth of the global economy.
——在新发展格局下，中国开放的大门将进一步敞开，同世界各国共享发展机遇。对外开放是中国的基本国策，任何时候都不会动摇。今年以来，面对世界经济不稳定性不确定性明显增强，单边主义、保护主义蔓延，中国对外开放非但没有止步，而且推出了一系列扩大开放的政策措施，包括全面实施外商投资法及其实施条例、进一步缩减外商投资准入负面清单、稳步推动金融市场准入、出台海南自由贸易港建设总体方案、强化深圳和浦东的改革开放举措、深化服务贸易创新发展试点等。我愿重申，中国对外开放的决心坚定不移，对外开放的大门会越开越大。我们将继续推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，积极参与多双边区域投资贸易合作机制，打造更高水平的开放型经济。完善外商投资准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度，依法保护外资企业合法权益，有序扩大服务业对外开放，持续打造市场化、法治化、国际化营商环境。赋予自由贸易试验区更大改革自主权，建设对外开放新高地。与此同时，我们将继续坚定支持多边贸易体制，更加积极地参与全球经济治理体系改革，推动建立更加公平合理的国际经济治理体系。
— The new development paradigm will enable China to open up wider and share more opportunities for common development with other countries. China is committed to opening-up, which is its fundamental policy, a policy that will not change at any time. The world economy has faced more instability and uncertainty this year. Protectionism and unilateralism are mounting. Yet China has not stalled in its pursuit of opening-up. As a matter of fact, we have taken many policy steps to open the country still wider. It includes the following: The Foreign Investment Law and its supporting rules and regulations have been fully implemented. The negative list for foreign investment has been further cut. Access to the financial market has been steadily eased. A master plan has been drawn up for the development of the Hainan Free Trade Port. Reform and opening-up in Shenzhen and Pudong have been further advanced. And more pilot programs have been conducted for creative promotion of trade in services. I wish to reiterate that China’s commitment to opening-up is strong, and that China will open its door still wider to the world. China will continue to advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, to conclude, through negotiation, high-standard free trade agreements with more countries, and to actively engage in bilateral, multilateral and regional mechanisms for trade and investment cooperation. The purpose is to build a higher-standard open economy in China. China will improve its system for foreign investment management based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list. The lawful rights and interests of foreign investors will be protected. China will open up the service sector in a well-planned way, and foster a market-oriented, world-class business environment underpinned by a sound legal framework. China will give its pilot free trade zones greater power in carrying out reform, and turn them into new pacesetters of opening-up. At the same time, China will continue to firmly support the multilateral trading system, get more actively involved in reforming the system of global economic governance, and play its part to make this system fairer and more equitable.
——在新发展格局下，中国的对外合作将不断深化，同世界各国实现互利共赢。我们将更加积极地参与国际分工，更加有效地融入全球产业链、供应链、价值链，更加主动地扩大对外交流合作。凡是愿同中国合作的国家、地区、企业，我们都会积极开展合作。我们将继续高举开放合作大旗，坚持多边主义和共商共建共享原则，推动高质量共建“一带一路”，推进同各国、各地区发展战略和互联互通规划对接，加强政策、规则、标准融通，同各国不断深化基础设施建设、产业、经贸、科技创新、公共卫生、人文等领域务实合作，把“一带一路”打造成合作之路、健康之路、复苏之路、增长之路，加强绿色发展合作，为推动世界共同发展、构建人类命运共同体贡献力量。
— The new development paradigm will enable China to continue to deepen international cooperation for shared benefits. China will take a more active part in the international division of labor, get more effectively integrated into global industrial, supply and value chains, and more enthusiastically expand exchanges and cooperation with other countries. We welcome cooperation with every other region, country, or company that wants to do so. China will remain committed to openness and cooperation, and adhere to multilateralism and the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. China will work to pursue high-quality Belt and Road cooperation with its partners, and seek greater complementarity between the development strategies and connectivity plans of regions and countries concerned. China will further harmonize policies, rules and standards with BRI partners, and deepen effective cooperation with them on infrastructure, industry, trade, scientific and technological innovation, public health and people-to-people exchange. Together, we will make the Belt and Road a model of cooperation, health, recovery and growth and deepen cooperation on green development. This will allow us to contribute to common development and the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
亚太是我们的共同家园，维护亚太和平稳定、促进发展繁荣符合我们的共同利益。亚太各国既有人员密切往来之利，也有跨洋相望的地利之便。我们顺应市场规律，抓住经济全球化、区域经济一体化机遇，领风气之先，走在了世界经济增长的前列。亚太地区发展和区域经济合作深化，有其深刻的历史必然性，符合亚太各国人民愿望，也必将继续展现出强大生命力。
The Asia-Pacific is our shared home. To sustain peace, stability, development and prosperity in the region meets the interests of us all. As Asia-Pacific economies are connected by the same ocean, we benefit from close interactions between our peoples and geographic proximity. We should follow market trends, seize opportunities created by economic globalization and regional economic integration and become forerunners driving global growth. The development of the Asia-Pacific and greater economic cooperation in our region represent an underlying historical trend, and such development and cooperation will continue to be imbued with strong vitality, because they respond to the call of the people in our region.
去年，我提出构建开放包容、创新增长、互联互通、合作共赢的亚太命运共同体。今年，在各方共同参与下，亚太经合组织制定出2020年后的宏伟愿景，为未来一个时期亚太经济合作提供了重要指引。我们要深化命运共同体意识，持续推进区域经济一体化，加快创新发展步伐，促进区域互联互通，实现包容和可持续发展，把愿景一步步转变为现实，为亚太人民造福。
Last year, I proposed building an Asia-Pacific community with a shared future featuring openness, inclusiveness, innovation-driven growth, greater connectivity and mutually beneficial cooperation. This year, thanks to participation of all economies concerned, the APEC Post-2020 Vision has been formulated, which sets out ambitious goals and important guidelines for our future cooperation. Let us not forget that we are a community with a common stake, and let us move toward closer regional economic integration. We need to accelerate innovation-driven growth, enhance regional connectivity, and realize inclusive and sustainable development. Step by step, we can surely turn our vision into reality and deliver a better life for people in the region.
亚太工商界是引领和推动经济增长的重要力量，你们是亚太发展和合作成就的贡献者和见证者，也是亚太未来发展的建设者和受益者。当今世界面临更为复杂多元的挑战，亚太合作也进入新的历史阶段。工商界需要更开阔的格局、更坚韧的企业家精神。相信这会给你们带来更广阔的发展空间。希望大家做开放发展的推动者，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，维护亚太产业链、供应链安全稳定，推动亚太经济率先走向复苏、走向繁荣。希望大家做创新增长的探索者，大胆推动组织创新、技术创新、市场创新，使亚太成为科技“沃土”、创新“高地”。希望大家做互利共赢的合作者，深挖合作潜力，做大合作蛋糕，造福各国人民。希望大家做社会责任的践行者，积极参与国际抗疫合作，关注和帮扶弱势群体，为全球发展注入更多正能量。
The Asia-Pacific business community is an engine driving economic growth. You have witnessed development and cooperation in our region; and indeed, you have contributed to it every step on the way. You have an important role to play in shaping the future of our region, and there is no doubt you will benefit from its development. Asia-Pacific cooperation has entered a new historical stage at a time when the world is facing multiple challenges. The business community needs a broader vision, greater resilience and stronger entrepreneurship. With them, I am sure you will create greater prospects for business development. I hope you will contribute your share to promoting openness and development. You may work to advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and ensure the security and stability of industrial and supply chains of our region; and your work will enable the Asia-Pacific to take the lead in achieving economic recovery and prosperity. I hope you will explore innovation-driven growth. You may take bold steps to pursue organizational, technological and market innovations; that will make the Asia-Pacific a fertile ground for scientific breakthroughs and a pacesetter for innovation. I hope you will be partners for achieving win-win cooperation. You may tap fully into the potential for cooperation, and make the pie of cooperation even bigger for all our people to benefit from. I hope you will actively fulfill your social responsibilities. You may all play active parts in the international fight against COVID-19 and do more to help disadvantaged groups to add more momentum to global development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
疫情终将过去，胜利必将到来。让我们携起手来，风雨同舟、守望相助，坚持开放合作，畅通内外循环，共创共享亚太和世界更加美好的未来！
The day will come when we finally beat COVID-19 and win victory in this fight. Let us work in solidarity and weather the storm together. Let us stay true to openness and cooperation and make development and circulations at home and overseas reinforce each other. Together, we can surely deliver a brighter future for all of us, both here in the Asia-Pacific and across the world!
