71. 习近平在世界经济论坛2017年年会开幕式上的主旨演讲
共担时代责任 共促全球发展
——在世界经济论坛2017年年会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2017年1月17日，达沃斯）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Jointly Shoulder Responsibility of Our Times, Promote Global Growth
-- Keynote Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping At the Opening Session Of the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2017
Davos, 17 January 2017
尊敬的洛伊特哈德主席和豪森先生，
尊敬的各国元首、政府首脑、副元首和夫人，
尊敬的国际组织负责人，
尊敬的施瓦布主席和夫人，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
President Doris Leuthard and Mr. Roland Hausin,
Heads of State and Government, Deputy Heads of State and Your Spouses,
Heads of International Organizations,
Dr. Klaus Schwab and Mrs. Hilde Schwab,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
很高兴来到美丽的达沃斯。达沃斯虽然只是阿尔卑斯山上的一个小镇，却是一个观察世界经济的重要窗口。大家从四面八方会聚这里，各种思想碰撞出智慧的火花，以较少的投入获得了很高的产出。我看这个现象可以称作“施瓦布经济学”。	
I'm delighted to come to beautiful Davos. Though just a small town in the Alps, Davos is an important window for taking the pulse of the global economy. People from around the world come here to exchange ideas and insights, which broaden their vision. This makes the WEF annual meeting a cost-effective brainstorming event, which I would call "Schwab economics".
“这是最好的时代，也是最坏的时代”，英国文学家狄更斯曾这样描述工业革命发生后的世界。今天，我们也生活在一个矛盾的世界之中。一方面，物质财富不断积累，科技进步日新月异，人类文明发展到历史最高水平。另一方面，地区冲突频繁发生，恐怖主义、难民潮等全球性挑战此起彼伏，贫困、失业、收入差距拉大，世界面临的不确定性上升。	
"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times." These are the words used by the English writer Charles Dickens to describe the world after the Industrial Revolution. Today, we also live in a world of contradictions. On the one hand, with growing material wealth and advances in science and technology, human civilization has developed as never before. On the other hand, frequent regional conflicts, global challenges like terrorism and refugees, as well as poverty, unemployment and widening income gap have all added to the uncertainties of the world.
对此，许多人感到困惑，世界到底怎么了？	
Many people feel bewildered and wonder: What has gone wrong with the world?
要解决这个困惑，首先要找准问题的根源。有一种观点把世界乱象归咎于经济全球化。经济全球化曾经被人们视为阿里巴巴的山洞，现在又被不少人看作潘多拉的盒子。国际社会围绕经济全球化问题展开了广泛讨论。	
To answer this question, one must first track the source of the problem. Some blame economic globalization for the chaos in the world. Economic globalization was once viewed as the treasure cave found by Ali Baba in The Arabian Nights, but it has now become the Pandora's box in the eyes of many. The international community finds itself in a heated debate on economic globalization.
今天，我想从经济全球化问题切入，谈谈我对世界经济的看法。	
Today, I wish to address the global economy in the context of economic globalization.
我想说的是，困扰世界的很多问题，并不是经济全球化造成的。比如，过去几年来，源自中东、北非的难民潮牵动全球，数以百万计的民众颠沛流离，甚至不少年幼的孩子在路途中葬身大海，让我们痛心疾首。导致这一问题的原因，是战乱、冲突、地区动荡。解决这一问题的出路，是谋求和平、推动和解、恢复稳定。再比如，国际金融危机也不是经济全球化发展的必然产物，而是金融资本过度逐利、金融监管严重缺失的结果。把困扰世界的问题简单归咎于经济全球化，既不符合事实，也无助于问题解决。	
The point I want to make is that many of the problems troubling the world are not caused by economic globalization. For instance, the refugee waves from the Middle East and North Africa in recent years have become a global concern. Several million people have been displaced, and some small children lost their lives while crossing the rough sea. This is indeed heartbreaking. It is war, conflict and regional turbulence that have created this problem, and its solution lies in making peace, promoting reconciliation and restoring stability. The international financial crisis is another example. It is not an inevitable outcome of economic globalization; rather, it is the consequence of excessive chase of profit by financial capital and grave failure of financial regulation. Just blaming economic globalization for the world's problems is inconsistent with reality, and it will not help solve the problems.
历史地看，经济全球化是社会生产力发展的客观要求和科技进步的必然结果，不是哪些人、哪些国家人为造出来的。经济全球化为世界经济增长提供了强劲动力，促进了商品和资本流动、科技和文明进步、各国人民交往。	
From the historical perspective, economic globalization resulted from growing social productivity, and is a natural outcome of scientific and technological progress, not something created by any individuals or any countries. Economic globalization has powered global growth and facilitated movement of goods and capital, advances in science, technology and civilization, and interactions among peoples.
当然，我们也要承认，经济全球化是一把“双刃剑”。当世界经济处于下行期的时候，全球经济“蛋糕”不容易做大，甚至变小了，增长和分配、资本和劳动、效率和公平的矛盾就会更加突出，发达国家和发展中国家都会感受到压力和冲击。反全球化的呼声，反映了经济全球化进程的不足，值得我们重视和深思。	
But we should also recognize that economic globalization is a double-edged sword. When the global economy is under downward pressure, it is hard to make the cake of global economy bigger. It may even shrink, which will strain the relations between growth and distribution, between capital and labor, and between efficiency and equity. Both developed and developing countries have felt the punch. Voices against globalization have laid bare pitfalls in the process of economic globalization that we need to take seriously.
“甘瓜抱苦蒂，美枣生荆棘。”从哲学上说，世界上没有十全十美的事物，因为事物存在优点就把它看得完美无缺是不全面的，因为事物存在缺点就把它看得一无是处也是不全面的。经济全球化确实带来了新问题，但我们不能就此把经济全球化一棍子打死，而是要适应和引导好经济全球化，消解经济全球化的负面影响，让它更好惠及每个国家、每个民族。	
As a line in an old Chinese poem goes, "Honey melons hang on bitter vines; sweet dates grow on thistles and thorns." In a philosophical sense, nothing is perfect in the world. One would fail to see the full picture if he claims something is perfect because of its merits, or if he views something as useless just because of its defects. It is true that economic globalization has created new problems, but this is no justification to write economic globalization off completely. Rather, we should adapt to and guide economic globalization, cushion its negative impact, and deliver its benefits to all countries and all nations.
当年，中国对经济全球化也有过疑虑，对加入世界贸易组织也有过忐忑。但是，我们认为，融入世界经济是历史大方向，中国经济要发展，就要敢于到世界市场的汪洋大海中去游泳，如果永远不敢到大海中去经风雨、见世面，总有一天会在大海中溺水而亡。所以，中国勇敢迈向了世界市场。在这个过程中，我们呛过水，遇到过漩涡，遇到过风浪，但我们在游泳中学会了游泳。这是正确的战略抉择。	
There was a time when China also had doubts about economic globalization, and was not sure whether it should join the World Trade Organization. But we came to the conclusion that integration into the global economy is a historical trend. To grow its economy, China must have the courage to swim in the vast ocean of the global market. If one is always afraid of bracing the storm and exploring the new world, he will sooner or later get drowned in the ocean. Therefore, China took a brave step to embrace the global market. We have had our fair share of choking in the water and encountered whirlpools and choppy waves, but we have learned how to swim in this process. It has proved to be a right strategic choice.
世界经济的大海，你要还是不要，都在那儿，是回避不了的。想人为切断各国经济的资金流、技术流、产品流、产业流、人员流，让世界经济的大海退回到一个一个孤立的小湖泊、小河流，是不可能的，也是不符合历史潮流的。	
Whether you like it or not, the global economy is the big ocean that you cannot escape from. Any attempt to cut off the flow of capital, technologies, products, industries and people between economies, and channel the waters in the ocean back into isolated lakes and creeks is simply not possible. Indeed, it runs counter to the historical trend.
人类历史告诉我们，有问题不可怕，可怕的是不敢直面问题，找不到解决问题的思路。面对经济全球化带来的机遇和挑战，正确的选择是，充分利用一切机遇，合作应对一切挑战，引导好经济全球化走向。	
The history of mankind tells us that problems are not to be feared. What should concern us is refusing to face up to problems and not knowing what to do about them. In the face of both opportunities and challenges of economic globalization, the right thing to do is to seize every opportunity, jointly meet challenges and chart the right course for economic globalization.
去年年底，我在亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议上提出，要让经济全球化进程更有活力、更加包容、更可持续。我们要主动作为、适度管理，让经济全球化的正面效应更多释放出来，实现经济全球化进程再平衡；我们要顺应大势、结合国情，正确选择融入经济全球化的路径和节奏；我们要讲求效率、注重公平，让不同国家、不同阶层、不同人群共享经济全球化的好处。这是我们这个时代的领导者应有的担当，更是各国人民对我们的期待。
At the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in late 2016, I spoke about the necessity to make the process of economic globalization more invigorated, more inclusive and more sustainable. We should act pro-actively and manage economic globalization as appropriate so as to release its positive impact and rebalance the process of economic globalization. We should follow the general trend, proceed from our respective national conditions and embark on the right pathway of integrating into economic globalization with the right pace. We should strike a balance between efficiency and equity to ensure that different countries, different social strata and different groups of people all share in the benefits of economic globalization. The people of all countries expect nothing less from us, and this is our unshirkable responsibility as leaders of our times.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
当前，最迫切的任务是引领世界经济走出困境。世界经济长期低迷，贫富差距、南北差距问题更加突出。究其根源，是经济领域三大突出矛盾没有得到有效解决。	
At present, the most pressing task before us is to steer the global economy out of difficulty. The global economy has remained sluggish for quite some time. The gap between the poor and the rich and between the South and the North is widening. The root cause is that the three critical issues in the economic sphere have not been effectively addressed.
一是全球增长动能不足，难以支撑世界经济持续稳定增长。世界经济增速处于7年来最低水平，全球贸易增速继续低于经济增速。短期性政策刺激效果不佳，深层次结构性改革尚在推进。世界经济正处在动能转换的换挡期，传统增长引擎对经济的拉动作用减弱，人工智能、3D打印等新技术虽然不断涌现，但新的经济增长点尚未形成。世界经济仍然未能开辟出一条新路。	
First, lack of robust driving forces for global growth makes it difficult to sustain the steady growth of the global economy. The growth of the global economy is now at its slowest pace in seven years. Growth of global trade has been slower than global GDP growth. Short-term policy stimuli are ineffective. Fundamental structural reform is just unfolding. The global economy is now in a period of moving toward new growth drivers, and the role of traditional engines to drive growth has weakened. Despite the emergence of new technologies such as artificial intelligence and 3D printing, new sources of growth are yet to emerge. A new path for the global economy remains elusive.
二是全球经济治理滞后，难以适应世界经济新变化。前不久，拉加德女士告诉我，新兴市场国家和发展中国家对全球经济增长的贡献率已经达到80%。过去数十年，国际经济力量对比深刻演变，而全球治理体系未能反映新格局，代表性和包容性很不够。全球产业布局在不断调整，新的产业链、价值链、供应链日益形成，而贸易和投资规则未能跟上新形势，机制封闭化、规则碎片化十分突出。全球金融市场需要增强抗风险能力，而全球金融治理机制未能适应新需求，难以有效化解国际金融市场频繁动荡、资产泡沫积聚等问题。
Second, inadequate global economic governance makes it difficult to adapt to new developments in the global economy. Madame Christine Lagarde recently told me that emerging markets and developing countries already contribute to 80% of the growth of the global economy. The global economic landscape has changed profoundly in the past few decades. However, the global governance system has not embraced those new changes and is therefore inadequate in terms of representation and inclusiveness. The global industrial landscape is changing and new industrial chains, value chains and supply chains are taking shape. However, trade and investment rules have not kept pace with these developments, resulting in acute problems such as closed mechanisms and fragmentation of rules. The global financial market needs to be more resilient against risks, but the global financial governance mechanism fails to meet the new requirement and is thus unable to effectively resolve problems such as frequent international financial market volatility and the build-up of asset bubbles.
三是全球发展失衡，难以满足人们对美好生活的期待。施瓦布先生在《第四次工业革命》一书中写道，第四次工业革命将产生极其广泛而深远的影响，包括会加剧不平等，特别是有可能扩大资本回报和劳动力回报的差距。全球最富有的1%人口拥有的财富量超过其余99%人口财富的总和，收入分配不平等、发展空间不平衡令人担忧。全球仍然有7亿多人口生活在极端贫困之中。对很多家庭而言，拥有温暖住房、充足食物、稳定工作还是一种奢望。这是当今世界面临的最大挑战，也是一些国家社会动荡的重要原因。	
Third, uneven global development makes it difficult to meet people's expectations for better lives. Dr. Schwab has observed in his book The Fourth Industrial Revolution that this round of industrial revolution will produce extensive and far-reaching impacts such as growing inequality, particularly the possible widening gap between return on capital and return on labor. The richest one percent of the world's population own more wealth than the remaining 99 percent. Inequality in income distribution and uneven development space are worrying. Over 700 million people in the world are still living in extreme poverty. For many families, to have warm houses, enough food and secure jobs is still a distant dream. This is the biggest challenge facing the world today. It is also what is behind the social turmoil in some countries.
这些问题反映出，当今世界经济增长、治理、发展模式存在必须解决的问题。国际红十字会创始人杜楠说过：“真正的敌人不是我们的邻国，而是饥饿、贫穷、无知、迷信和偏见。”我们既要有分析问题的智慧，更要有采取行动的勇气。	
All this shows that there are indeed problems with world economic growth, governance and development models, and they must be resolved. The founder of the Red Cross Henry Dunant once said, "Our real enemy is not the neighboring country; it is hunger, poverty, ignorance, superstition and prejudice." We need to have the vision to dissect these problems; more importantly, we need to have the courage to take actions to address them.
第一，坚持创新驱动，打造富有活力的增长模式。世界经济面临的根本问题是增长动力不足。创新是引领发展的第一动力。与以往历次工业革命相比，第四次工业革命是以指数级而非线性速度展开。我们必须在创新中寻找出路。只有敢于创新、勇于变革，才能突破世界经济增长和发展的瓶颈。	
First, we should develop a dynamic, innovation-driven growth model. The fundamental issue plaguing the global economy is the lack of driving force for growth. Innovation is the primary force guiding development. Unlike the previous industrial revolutions, the fourth industrial revolution is unfolding at an exponential rather than linear pace. We need to relentlessly pursue innovation. Only with the courage to innovate and reform can we remove bottlenecks blocking global growth and development.
二十国集团领导人在杭州峰会上达成重要共识，要以创新为重要抓手，挖掘各国和世界经济增长新动力。我们要创新发展理念，超越财政刺激多一点还是货币宽松多一点的争论，树立标本兼治、综合施策的思路。我们要创新政策手段，推进结构性改革，为增长创造空间、增加后劲。我们要创新增长方式，把握好新一轮产业革命、数字经济等带来的机遇，既应对好气候变化、人口老龄化等带来的挑战，也化解掉信息化、自动化等给就业带来的冲击，在培育新产业新业态新模式过程中注意创造新的就业机会，让各国人民重拾信心和希望。	
With this in mind, G20 leaders reached an important consensus at the Hangzhou Summit, which is to take innovation as a key driver and foster new driving force of growth for both individual countries and the global economy. We should develop a new development philosophy and rise above the debate about whether there should be more fiscal stimulus or more monetary easing. We should adopt a multipronged approach to address both the symptoms and the underlying problems. We should adopt new policy instruments and advance structural reform to create more space for growth and sustain its momentum. We should develop new growth models and seize opportunities presented by the new round of industrial revolution and digital economy. We should meet the challenges of climate change and aging population. We should address the negative impact of IT application and automation on jobs. When cultivating new industries and new forms models of business models, we should create new jobs and restore confidence and hope to our peoples.
第二，坚持协同联动，打造开放共赢的合作模式。人类已经成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体，利益高度融合，彼此相互依存。每个国家都有发展权利，同时都应该在更加广阔的层面考虑自身利益，不能以损害其他国家利益为代价。	
Second, we should pursue a well-coordinated and inter-connected approach to develop a model of open and win-win cooperation. Today, mankind has become a close-knit community of shared future. Countries have extensive converging interests and are mutually dependent. All countries enjoy the right to development. At the same time, they should view their own interests in a broader context and refrain from pursuing them at the expense of others.
我们要坚定不移发展开放型世界经济，在开放中分享机会和利益、实现互利共赢。不能一遇到风浪就退回到港湾中去，那是永远不能到达彼岸的。我们要下大气力发展全球互联互通，让世界各国实现联动增长，走向共同繁荣。我们要坚定不移发展全球自由贸易和投资，在开放中推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义。搞保护主义如同把自己关进黑屋子，看似躲过了风吹雨打，但也隔绝了阳光和空气。打贸易战的结果只能是两败俱伤。	
We should commit ourselves to growing an open global economy to share opportunities and interests through opening-up and achieve win-win outcomes. One should not just retreat to the harbor when encountering a storm, for this will never get us to the other shore of the ocean. We must redouble efforts to develop global connectivity to enable all countries to achieve inter-connected growth and share prosperity. We must remain committed to developing global free trade and investment, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation through opening-up and say no to protectionism. Pursuing protectionism is like locking oneself in a dark room. While wind and rain may be kept outside, that dark room will also block light and air. No one will emerge as a winner in a trade war.
第三，坚持与时俱进，打造公正合理的治理模式。小智治事，大智治制。全球经济治理体系变革紧迫性越来越突出，国际社会呼声越来越高。全球治理体系只有适应国际经济格局新要求，才能为全球经济提供有力保障。	
Third, we should develop a model of fair and equitable governance in keeping with the trend of the times. As the Chinese saying goes, people with petty shrewdness attend to trivial matters, while people with vision attend to governance of institutions. There is a growing call from the international community for reforming the global economic governance system, which is a pressing task for us. Only when it adapts to new dynamics in the international economic architecture can the global governance system sustain global growth.
国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会平等成员，理应平等参与决策、享受权利、履行义务。要赋予新兴市场国家和发展中国家更多代表性和发言权。2010年国际货币基金组织份额改革方案已经生效，这一势头应该保持下去。要坚持多边主义，维护多边体制权威性和有效性。要践行承诺、遵守规则，不能按照自己的意愿取舍或选择。《巴黎协定》符合全球发展大方向，成果来之不易，应该共同坚守，不能轻言放弃。这是我们对子孙后代必须担负的责任！	
Countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are all equal members of the international community. As such, they are entitled to participate in decision-making, enjoy rights and fulfill obligations on an equal basis. Emerging markets and developing countries deserve greater representation and voice. The 2010 IMF quota reform has entered into force, and its momentum should be sustained. We should adhere to multilateralism to uphold the authority and efficacy of multilateral institutions. We should honor promises and abide by rules. One should not select or bend rules as he sees fit. The Paris Agreement is a hard-won achievement which is in keeping with the underlying trend of global development. All signatories should stick to it instead of walking away from it as this is a responsibility we must assume for future generations.
第四，坚持公平包容，打造平衡普惠的发展模式。“大道之行也，天下为公。”发展的目的是造福人民。要让发展更加平衡，让发展机会更加均等、发展成果人人共享，就要完善发展理念和模式，提升发展公平性、有效性、协同性。	
Fourth, we should develop a balanced, equitable and inclusive development model. As the Chinese saying goes, "A just cause should be pursued for common good." Development is ultimately for the people. To achieve more balanced development and ensure that the people have equal access to opportunities and share in the benefits of development, it is crucial to have a sound development philosophy and model and make development equitable, effective and balanced.
我们要倡导勤劳俭朴、努力奋进的社会风气，让所有人的劳动成果得到尊重。要着力解决贫困、失业、收入差距拉大等问题，照顾好弱势人群的关切，促进社会公平正义。要保护好生态环境，推动经济、社会、环境协调发展，实现人与自然、人与社会和谐。要落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程，实现全球范围平衡发展。	
We should foster a culture that values diligence, frugality and enterprise and respects the fruits of hard work of all. Priority should be given to addressing poverty, unemployment, the widening income gap and the concerns of the disadvantaged to promote social equity and justice. It is important to protect the environment while pursuing economic and social progress so as to achieve harmony between man and nature and between man and society. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be implemented to realize balanced development across the world.
“积力之所举，则无不胜也；众智之所为，则无不成也。”只要我们牢固树立人类命运共同体意识，携手努力、共同担当，同舟共济、共渡难关，就一定能够让世界更美好、让人民更幸福。	
A Chinese adage reads, "Victory is ensured when people pool their strength; success is secured when people put their heads together." As long as we keep to the goal of building a community of shared future for mankind and work hand in hand to fulfill our responsibilities and overcome difficulties, we will be able to create a better world and deliver better lives for our peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
经过38年改革开放，中国已经成为世界第二大经济体。道路决定命运。中国的发展，关键在于中国人民在中国共产党领导下，走出了一条适合中国国情的发展道路。	
China has become the world's second largest economy thanks to 38 years of reform and opening-up. A right path leads to a bright future. China has come this far because the Chinese people have, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, blazed a development path that suits China's actual conditions.
这是一条从本国国情出发确立的道路。中国立足自身国情和实践，从中华文明中汲取智慧，博采东西方各家之长，坚守但不僵化，借鉴但不照搬，在不断探索中形成了自己的发展道路。条条大路通罗马。谁都不应该把自己的发展道路定为一尊，更不应该把自己的发展道路强加于人。	
This is a path based on China's realities. China has in the past years succeeded in embarking on a development path that suits itself by drawing on both the wisdom of its civilization and the practices of other countries in both East and West. In exploring this path, China refuses to stay insensitive to the changing times or to blindly follow in others' footsteps. All roads lead to Rome. No country should view its own development path as the only viable one, still less should it impose its own development path on others.
这是一条把人民利益放在首位的道路。中国秉持以人民为中心的发展思想，把改善人民生活、增进人民福祉作为出发点和落脚点，在人民中寻找发展动力、依靠人民推动发展、使发展造福人民。中国坚持共同富裕的目标，大力推进减贫事业，让7亿多人口摆脱贫困，正在向着全面建成小康社会目标快步前进。	
This is a path that puts people's interests first. China follows a people-oriented development philosophy and is committed to bettering the lives of its people. Development is of the people, by the people and for the people. China pursues the goal of common prosperity. We have taken major steps to alleviate poverty and lifted over 700 million people out of poverty, and good progress is being made in our efforts to finish building a society of initial prosperity in all respects.
这是一条改革创新的道路。中国坚持通过改革破解前进中遇到的困难和挑战，敢于啃硬骨头、涉险滩，勇于破除妨碍发展的体制机制障碍，不断解放和发展社会生产力，不断解放和增强社会活力。近4年来，我们在之前30多年不断改革的基础上，又推出了1200多项改革举措，为中国发展注入了强大动力。	
This is a path of pursuing reform and innovation. China has tackled difficulties and met challenges on its way forward through reform. China has demonstrated its courage to take on difficult issues, navigate treacherous rapids and remove institutional hurdles standing in the way of development. These efforts have enabled us to unleash productivity and social vitality. Building on progress of 30-odd years of reform, we have introduced more than 1,200 reform measures over the past four years, injecting powerful impetus into China's development.
这是一条在开放中谋求共同发展的道路。中国坚持对外开放基本国策，奉行互利共赢的开放战略，不断提升发展的内外联动性，在实现自身发展的同时更多惠及其他国家和人民。
This is a path of pursuing common development through opening-up. China is committed to a fundamental policy of opening-up and pursues a win-win opening-up strategy. China's development is both domestic and external oriented; while developing itself, China also shares more of its development outcomes with other countries and peoples.
中国发展取得了巨大成就，中国人民生活得到了极大改善，这对中国好，对世界也好。中国的发展成就，是中国人民几十年含辛茹苦、流血流汗干出来的。千百年来，中华民族素以吃苦耐劳闻名于世。中国人民深知，世界上没有免费的午餐，中国是一个有着13亿多人口的大国，想发展就要靠自己苦干实干，不能寄托于别人的恩赐，世界上也没有谁有这样的能力。观察中国发展，要看中国人民得到了什么收获，更要看中国人民付出了什么辛劳；要看中国取得了什么成就，更要看中国为世界作出了什么贡献。这才是全面的看法。
China's outstanding development achievements and the vastly improved living standards of the Chinese people are a blessing to both China and the world. Such achievements in development over the past decades owe themselves to the hard work and perseverance of the Chinese people, a quality that has defined the Chinese nation for several thousand years. We Chinese know only too well that there is no such thing as a free lunch in the world. For a big country with over 1.3 billion people, development can be achieved only with the dedication and tireless efforts of its own people. We cannot expect others to deliver development to China, and no one is in a position to do so. When assessing China's development, one should not only see what benefits the Chinese people have gained, but also how much hard effort they have put in, not just what achievements China has made, but also what contribution China has made to the world. Then one will reach a balanced conclusion about China's development.
1950年至2016年，中国在自身长期发展水平和人民生活水平不高的情况下，累计对外提供援款4000多亿元人民币，实施各类援外项目5000多个，其中成套项目近3000个，举办11000多期培训班，为发展中国家在华培训各类人员26万多名。改革开放以来，中国累计吸引外资超过1.7万亿美元，累计对外直接投资超过1.2万亿美元，为世界经济发展作出了巨大贡献。国际金融危机爆发以来，中国经济增长对世界经济增长的贡献率年均在30%以上。这些数字，在世界上都是名列前茅的。	
Between 1950 and 2016, despite its modest level of development and living standard, China provided more than 400 billion yuan of foreign assistance, undertook over 5,000 foreign assistance projects, including nearly 3,000 complete projects, and held over 11,000 training workshops in China for over 260,000 personnel from other developing countries. Since it launched reform and opening-up, China has attracted over 1.7 trillion US dollars of foreign investment and made over 1.2 trillion US dollars of direct outbound investment, making huge contribution to global economic development. In the years following the outbreak of the international financial crisis, China contributed to over 30% of global growth every year on average. All these figures are among the highest in the world.
从这些数字可以看出，中国的发展是世界的机遇，中国是经济全球化的受益者，更是贡献者。中国经济快速增长，为全球经济稳定和增长提供了持续强大的推动。中国同一大批国家的联动发展，使全球经济发展更加平衡。中国减贫事业的巨大成就，使全球经济增长更加包容。中国改革开放持续推进，为开放型世界经济发展提供了重要动力。	
The figures speak for themselves. China's development is an opportunity for the world; China has not only benefited from economic globalization but also contributed to it. Rapid growth in China has been a sustained, powerful engine for global economic stability and expansion. The inter-connected development of China and a large number of other countries has made the world economy more balanced. China's remarkable achievement in poverty reduction has contributed to more inclusive global growth. And China's continuous progress in reform and opening-up has lent much momentum to an open world economy.
中国人民深知实现国家繁荣富强的艰辛，对各国人民取得的发展成就都点赞，都为他们祝福，都希望他们的日子越过越好，不会犯“红眼病”，不会抱怨他人从中国发展中得到了巨大机遇和丰厚回报。中国人民张开双臂欢迎各国人民搭乘中国发展的“快车”、“便车”。
We Chinese know only too well what it takes to achieve prosperity, so we applaud the achievements made by others and wish them a better future. We are not jealous of others' success; and we will not complain about others who have benefited so much from the great opportunities presented by China's development. We will open our arms to the people of other countries and welcome them aboard the express train of China's development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
很多人都在关注中国经济发展趋势。中国经济发展进入了新常态，经济增速、经济发展方式、经济结构、经济发展动力都正在发生重大变化。但中国经济长期向好的基本面没有改变。	
I know you are all closely following China's economic development, and let me give you an update on the state of China's economy. China's economy has entered what we call a new normal, in which major changes are taking place in terms of growth rate, development model, economic structure and drivers of growth. But the economic fundamentals sustaining sound development remain unchanged.
2016年，在世界经济疲弱的背景下，中国经济预计增长6.7%，依然处于世界前列。现在，中国经济的体量已不能同过去同日而语，集聚的动能是过去两位数的增长都达不到的。中国居民消费和服务业成为经济增长的主要动力，2016年前三季度第三产业增加值占国内生产总值的比重为52.8%，国内消费对经济增长的贡献率达71%。居民收入和就业实现稳定增长，单位国内生产总值能耗持续下降，绿色发展初见成效。	
Despite a sluggish global economy, China's economy is expected to grow by 6.7% in 2016, still one of the highest in the world. China's economy is far bigger in size than in the past, and it now generates more output than it did with double-digit growth in the past. Household consumption and the services sector have become the main drivers of growth. In the first three quarters of 2016, added value of the tertiary industry took up 52.8% of the GDP and domestic consumption contributed to 71% of economic growth. Household income and employment have steadily risen, while per unit GDP energy consumption continues to drop. Our efforts to pursue green development are paying off.
当前，中国经济面临一定的下行压力和不少困难，如产能过剩和需求结构升级矛盾突出，经济增长内生动力不足，金融风险有所积聚，部分地区困难增多。我们认为，这些都是前进中必然出现的阶段性现象，对这些问题和矛盾，我们正在着力加以解决，并不断取得积极成效。我们坚定向前发展的决心不会动摇。中国仍然是世界上最大的发展中国家，中国有13亿多人口，人民生活水平还不高，但这也意味着巨大的发展潜力和空间。我们将在创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念指引下，不断适应、把握、引领中国经济发展新常态，统筹抓好稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险工作，推动中国经济保持中高速增长、迈向中高端水平。	
The Chinese economy faces downward pressure and many difficulties, including acute mismatch between excess capacity and an upgrading demand structure, lack of internal driving force for growth, accumulation of financial risks, and growing challenges in certain regions. We see these as temporary hardships that occur on the way forward. And the measures we have taken to address these problems are producing good results. We are firm in our resolve to forge ahead. China is the world's largest developing country with over 1.3 billion people, and their living standards are not yet high. But this reality also means China has enormous potential and space for development. Guided by the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, we will adapt to the new normal, stay ahead of the curve, and make coordinated efforts to maintain steady growth, accelerate reform, adjust economic structure, improve people's living standards and fend off risks. With these efforts, we aim to achieve medium-high rate of growth and upgrade the economy to higher end of the value chain.
——中国将着力提升经济增长质量和效益，围绕供给侧结构性改革这条主线，转变经济发展方式，优化经济结构，积极推进去产能、去库存、去杠杆、降成本、补短板，培育增长新动能，发展先进制造业，实现实体经济升级，深入实施“互联网+”行动计划，扩大有效需求，更好满足人们个性化、多样化的需求，更好保护生态环境。	
— China will strive to enhance the performance of economic growth. We will pursue supply-side structural reform as the general goal, shift the growth model and upgrade the economic structure. We will continue to cut overcapacity, reduce inventory, deleverage financing, reduce cost and strengthen weak links. We will foster new drivers of growth, develop an advanced manufacturing sector and upgrade the real economy. We will implement the Internet Plus action plan to boost effective demand and better meet the individualized and diverse needs of consumers. And we will do more to protect the ecosystem.
——中国将不断激发增长动力和市场活力，加大重要领域和关键环节改革力度，让市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，牵住创新这个“牛鼻子”，推进创新驱动发展战略，推动战略性新兴产业发展，注重用新技术新业态改造提升传统产业，促进新动能发展壮大、传统动能焕发生机。	
— China will boost market vitality to add new impetus to growth. We will intensify reform efforts in priority areas and key links and enable the market to play a decisive role in resources allocation. Innovation will continue to feature prominently on our growth agenda. In pursuing the strategy of innovation-driven development, we will bolster the strategic emerging industries, apply new technologies and foster new business models to upgrade traditional industries; and we will boost new drivers of growth and revitalize traditional ones.
——中国将积极营造宽松有序的投资环境，放宽外商投资准入，建设高标准自由贸易试验区，加强产权保护，促进公平竞争，让中国市场更加透明、更加规范。预计未来5年，中国将进口8万亿美元的商品、吸收6000亿美元的外来投资，对外投资总额将达到7500亿美元，出境旅游将达到7亿人次。这将为世界各国提供更广阔市场、更充足资本、更丰富产品、更宝贵合作契机。对各国工商界而言，中国发展仍然是大家的机遇。中国的大门对世界始终是打开的，不会关上。开着门，世界能够进入中国，中国也才能走向世界。我们希望，各国的大门也对中国投资者公平敞开。	
— China will foster an enabling and orderly environment for investment. We will expand market access for foreign investors, build high-standard pilot free trade zones, strengthen protection of property rights, and level the playing field to make China's market more transparent and better regulated. In the coming five years, China is expected to import eight trillion US dollars of goods, attract 600 billion US dollars of foreign investment and make 750 billion US dollars of outbound investment. Chinese tourists will make 700 million overseas visits. All this will create a bigger market, more capital, more products and more business opportunities for other countries. China's development will continue to offer opportunities to business communities in other countries. China will keep its door wide open and not close it. An open door allows both other countries to access the Chinese market and China itself to integrate with the world. And we hope that other countries will also keep their door open to Chinese investors and keep the playing field level for us.
——中国将大力建设共同发展的对外开放格局，推进亚太自由贸易区建设和区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判，构建面向全球的自由贸易区网络。中国一贯主张建设开放透明、互利共赢的区域自由贸易安排，而不是搞排他性、碎片化的小圈子。中国无意通过人民币贬值提升贸易竞争力，更不会主动打货币战。	
— China will vigorously foster an external environment of opening-up for common development. We will advance the building of the Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific and negotiations of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership to form a global network of free trade arrangements. China stands for concluding open, transparent and win-win regional free trade arrangements and opposes forming exclusive groups that are fragmented in nature. China has no intention to boost its trade competitiveness by devaluing the RMB, still less will it launch a currency war.
3年多前，我提出了“一带一路”倡议。3年多来，已经有100多个国家和国际组织积极响应支持，40多个国家和国际组织同中国签署合作协议，“一带一路”的“朋友圈”正在不断扩大。中国企业对沿线国家投资达到500多亿美元，一系列重大项目落地开花，带动了各国经济发展，创造了大量就业机会。可以说，“一带一路”倡议来自中国，但成效惠及世界。	
Over three years ago, I put forward the "Belt and Road" initiative. Since then, over 100 countries and international organizations have given warm responses and support to the initiative. More than 40 countries and international organizations have signed cooperation agreements with China, and our circle of friends along the "Belt and Road" is growing bigger. Chinese companies have made over 50 billion US dollars of investment and launched a number of major projects in the countries along the routes, spurring the economic development of these countries and creating many local jobs. The "Belt and Road" initiative originated in China, but it has delivered benefits well beyond its borders.
今年5月，中国将在北京主办“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛，共商合作大计，共建合作平台，共享合作成果，为解决当前世界和区域经济面临的问题寻找方案，为实现联动式发展注入新能量，让“一带一路”建设更好造福各国人民。	
In May this year, China will host in Beijing the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, which aims to discuss ways to boost cooperation, build cooperation platforms and share cooperation outcomes. The forum will also explore ways to address problems facing global and regional economy, create fresh energy for pursuing inter-connected development and make the "Belt and Road" initiative deliver greater benefits to people of countries involved.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
世界历史发展告诉我们，人类文明进步历程从来没有平坦的大道可走，人类就是在同困难的斗争中前进的。再大的困难，都不可能阻挡人类前行的步伐。遇到了困难，不要埋怨自己，不要指责他人，不要放弃信心，不要逃避责任，而是要一起来战胜困难。历史是勇敢者创造的。让我们拿出信心、采取行动，携手向着未来前进！	
World history shows that the road of human civilization has never been a smooth one, and that mankind has made progress by surmounting difficulties. No difficulty, however daunting, will stop mankind from advancing. When encountering difficulties, we should not complain about ourselves, blame others, lose confidence or run away from responsibilities. We should join hands and rise to the challenge. History is created by the brave. Let us boost confidence, take actions and march arm-in-arm toward a bright future.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!
