72. 习近平在瑞士媒体发表署名文章《深化务实合作 共谋和平发展》
深化务实合作 共谋和平发展
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
A Shared Commitment to Practical Cooperation and Peaceful Development
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
我很高兴2017年第一次出访就来到瑞士这个美丽的国家。这是我首次以中国国家主席身份访问瑞士，也是新世纪以来中国国家元首对瑞士进行的首次国事访问。	
I am very pleased to come to the beautiful country of Switzerland for my first overseas trip in 2017. This is the first time for me to visit Switzerland as Chinese President and the first state visit by a Chinese head of state in the new century.
瑞士著名诗人、诺贝尔文学奖获得者施皮特勒说：“找到同呼吸、共命运的朋友是人世间最大的幸福。”访问期间，我将同瑞士联邦委员会、联邦议会领导人会谈会见，同社会各界进行广泛接触和交流。我将赴达沃斯出席世界经济论坛2017年年会，并到日内瓦、洛桑访问联合国机构和国际组织总部。我对这次瑞士之行充满期待。	
The well-known Swiss poet and Nobel laureate Carl Spitteler once said that there is no greater happiness than having friends who share the same outlook and destiny with oneself. During my visit, I will have talks and meetings with leaders of the Swiss Federal Council and Federal Assembly and have extensive contact and discussion with people from various sectors. I will also attend the World Economic Forum (WEF) Annual Meeting 2017 in Davos and visit the headquarters of UN agencies and international organizations in Geneva and Lausanne. I am very much looking forward to this trip.
（一）	I
中瑞两国虽然相距遥远，但瑞士对中国人民来说并不陌生。瑞士被誉为“欧洲屋脊”和“科技创新之国”，风光秀美，人民勤劳，经济发达。	
Despite the great distance between our two countries, the Chinese people are no strangers to Switzerland. Known as the roof of Europe and a leader in innovation, Switzerland boasts beautiful landscape, hard-working people and an advanced economy.
中瑞两国交往合作源远流长。早在上世纪初，瑞士钟表、制药、纺织、机械产品就已经远销中国，瑞士金融保险机构也在华开展业务。	
The exchange and cooperation between us go back a long way. In the early 20th century, Swiss-made clocks and watches, medicine, textiles and mechanical products were already sold in China, and Swiss financial and insurance services also had presence there.
上世纪50年代，瑞士成为最早承认并同新中国建交的西方国家之一。1954年，周恩来总理率团出席日内瓦会议，向世界展示了新中国外交的风格和特色。	
In 1950, Switzerland was one of the first Western countries to recognize and establish diplomatic relations with New China. In 1954, Premier Zhou Enlai led the Chinese delegation to the Geneva Conference, unveiling to the world the diplomatic style and approach of the young People' s Republic.
中国实行改革开放之初，瑞士企业就在华设立了第一家中外合资工业企业。进入新世纪，瑞士在欧洲国家中率先承认中国完全市场经济地位。	
Shortly after China began its reform and opening-up program in the late 1970s, a Swiss company set up the first industrial joint venture in China. At the start of this century, Switzerland was among the first European countries to recognize China as a full market economy.
近年来，瑞士成为首个同中国签署并实施自由贸易协定的欧洲大陆国家。在支持人民币国际化、参与创立亚洲基础设施投资银行、互免持外交护照人员签证等方面，中瑞合作展现了与时俱进、敢为人先的创新精神，对中欧合作发挥了示范作用。	
In recent years, Switzerland became the first European continental country to conclude and implement a free trade agreement with China. Our two countries have taken pioneering and innovative steps in our engagement with each other, such as Switzerland' s support for the internationalization of the RMB, its participation in the founding of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and mutual visa exemption for diplomatic passport-holders of our two countries. These have set a good example for cooperation between China and other European countries.
中瑞关系保持高水平发展。去年4月，我同来中国进行国事访问的施奈德－阿曼联邦主席一道，宣布建立中瑞创新战略伙伴关系，这是中国首次同外国建立以创新为标志的战略伙伴关系。中瑞关系进入新的发展阶段。	
The China-Switzerland relationship is growing from strength to strength. During his state visit to China last April, President Johann Schneider-Ammann and I announced the establishment of an innovative strategic partnership between the two countries, the first of its kind for China featuring innovation. This marked a new phase of our bilateral relations.
中瑞两国是不同社会制度、不同发展阶段、不同大小国家友好合作的典范。这是因为两国人民彼此怀有友好感情，更是因为双方相互尊重各自选择的社会制度和发展道路，秉承平等相待、创新共赢的合作精神发展双边关系。	
The relations between our countries are a model of friendship and cooperation between countries that are different in size, social system and development stage. This is made possible by our people' s mutual goodwill, by a shared commitment to growing our bilateral relations on the basis of equality, innovation and win-win cooperation, and above all, by our respect for each other' s social system and development path.
在当前国际形势复杂多变、世界经济复苏乏力的背景下，中瑞携手合作，全面深化创新战略伙伴关系，可以造福两国人民、带动中欧关系发展，也可以为当今国际关系稳定发展、世界经济复苏、贸易自由化作出积极贡献。
In a complex and fast-changing world beset by weak economic recovery, China and Switzerland need to work together to deepen the innovative strategic partnership across the board. This will not only benefit our peoples and grow China-Europe relations, but also contribute to the steady progress of international relations, global recovery and fair trade.
面向未来，我们两国要在以下方面作出努力。	
Going forward, we need to deepen our engagement in the following areas:
——保持高层交往。发挥两国各层级对话和磋商机制作用，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持。	
- Maintaining high-level exchanges. We should leverage the dialogue and consultation mechanisms at various levels and show mutual understanding and support on issues concerning each other' s core interests and major concerns.
——创新务实合作。通过建立中瑞高水平创新合作等平台，推动两国企业、高校、科研机构开展创新合作，拓展节能环保、气候变化、知识产权、金融、生态农业、社会保障等领域合作。加强在联合国等国际组织及国际事务中的协调和合作，共同致力于和平解决国际争端，为国际形势注入稳定因素。	
- Breaking new ground in practical cooperation. The newly established Sino-Swiss High-level Innovative Dialogue will enable us to promote collaboration between our companies, universities and research institutes and in energy conservation, environmental protection, climate change, IPR protection, financial services, eco-agriculture and social security. We may also increase coordination and cooperation at the UN and other multilateral organizations and in international affairs, work for the peaceful settlement of international disputes and promote stability in the world.
——加强人文交流。以签署中瑞新的文化合作协议、中国在伯尔尼建立中国文化中心、共同举办中瑞旅游年为契机，扩大两国民间和青年交流，便利两国人员往来，加强两国旅游、冬季运动、职业教育、地方交往等领域合作，巩固中瑞关系社会基础。	
- Expanding people-to-people exchanges. With the signing of the new cultural cooperation agreement, the establishment of the Chinese cultural center in Bern and the launch of the year of tourism, we are well placed to expand people-to-people and youth exchanges, facilitate personnel visits, and beef up cooperation in tourism, winter sports and vocational education and at the subnational level. All this will help cement public support for China-Switzerland relations.
——完善中瑞自由贸易区。积极探讨升级中瑞自由贸易协定，发挥其示范作用，共同维护自由开放的国际贸易和投资体系。利用亚洲基础设施投资银行、中国－中东欧国家合作等多边合作平台，助力中欧“一带一路”合作。	
- Improving our Free Trade Area. We may actively explore the possibility of upgrading the Free Trade Agreement, and set a good example of promoting the free and open international trade and investment system. We may also step up China-Europe cooperation on the Belt and Road Initiative through the AIIB and the cooperation mechanism between China and Central and Eastern European countries.
（二）	II
2016年9月，在美丽的西子湖畔，在二十国集团领导人杭州峰会上，中方同各方凝聚共识，为构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济注入了新动力。今年，我首次赴达沃斯，希望在世界经济论坛年会上同各方坦诚深入交流，增强应对挑战的信心，推动世界经济恢复增长。	
In September 2016, the G20 Hangzhou Summit took place by the picturesque West Lake. During the summit, China worked with other parties to strive for consensus and inject momentum into the efforts to build an innovative, invigorated, interconnected and inclusive world economy. As I make my first trip to Davos for the WEF annual meeting, I look forward to candid and in-depth exchanges with the participants. It is a good opportunity to boost confidence in rising to challenges and re-energize world economic growth.
瑞士达沃斯世界闻名。每逢新年伊始，来自世界不同地区、国家、领域的各界人士在此聚会，交流观点，碰撞思想，吸引着世界的目光。特别是国际金融危机爆发以来，世界经济论坛年会成为各方集思广益、对话合作的重要平台。这种同舟共济、共克时艰的精神为促进世界经济复苏发挥了积极作用。	
Davos is a well-known town. At the start of each new year, people from different regions, countries and backgrounds would come and meet here. Such a meeting of minds has always been under international spotlight. This has been especially so in the wake of the global financial crisis, when the WEF annual meetings have emerged as a major platform for brainstorming, dialogue and cooperation. Sticking together in times of difficulty, this is the very spirit that has helped to put the world economy on the path of recovery.
当前，人们普遍对世界经济发展前景感到焦虑，反经济全球化思潮、民粹主义、贸易保护主义明显上升，主张对现行发展道路、分配制度、治理模式进行反思和变革的声音增多，世界经济走向成为各方共同关心的问题。	
We meet at a time of angst about the prospects of the world economy, growing backlash against economic globalization, and rising populism and trade protectionism. There is a stronger call for revisiting and changing the current paths of development, systems of wealth distribution and models of governance. The direction of the world economy is a subject of heated discussion.
中国一直同包括欧洲国家在内的世界各国一道，探索应对全球发展面临的挑战。我们主动适应外部环境变化和中国经济发展新常态，以创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念为指引，推进供给侧结构性改革，培育增长新动能，取得积极成效。中国将继续为世界经济增长提供巨大市场空间，继续成为各国投资的热土，继续为增进各国人民福祉作出贡献。	
China has been working with European countries, among others, to address the challenges facing global development. We have taken the initiative to adapt to the fluid external environment and the "new normal" of the Chinese economy. We have followed the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, and made good progress in deepening supply-side structural reform and fostering new growth drivers. China will continue to be a huge market supporting world economic growth, a hot destination attracting foreign investment and a contributor to the well-being of people around the world.
（三）	III
日内瓦在近现代国际关系史上具有举足轻重的地位，见证了联合国及其专门机构等政府间国际组织的发展，提供了达成伊朗核、叙利亚、中东和平进程等重要热点问题阶段性协议的平台，促成了《日内瓦公约》、《全面禁止核试验条约》等一系列国际条约和法律文书的通过。	
Geneva has a prominent place in the international relations of the modern era. The city has witnessed the development of inter-governmental organizations such as the UN and its specialized agencies, served as the venue for negotiating key agreements on hotspot issues, including the Iranian nuclear issue, Syria and the Middle East peace process, and facilitated the adoption of many international treaties and legal instruments, notably the Geneva Convention and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
1971年，中国恢复在联合国合法席位并重返位于日内瓦的国际机构后，深入参与和平、安全、发展、人权、社会等各领域治理，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出了自己的贡献。中国和各国人民通过长期探索特别是在日内瓦的多边外交实践，倡导了主权平等、和平和解、法治正义、开放包容、人道主义等理念和原则。这些既体现了日内瓦多边主义精神的内涵，也是中国外交的传统。	
After regaining its lawful seat in the UN and returning to various international organizations in Geneva in 1971, China has deepened its involvement in the governance of peace, security, development, human rights and social agenda, making its due contribution to the lofty cause of peace and development. Decades of hard work, especially multilateral diplomacy practised here in Geneva, has inspired the people in China and elsewhere to establish the notions and principles of sovereign equality, peaceful reconciliation, the rule of law and justice, openness and inclusiveness, and humanitarianism. These reflect both the Geneva spirit of multilateralism and the fine tradition of Chinese diplomacy.
我这次访问联合国日内瓦总部，是想同各方重温历史，弘扬各方公认的外交理念，探索构建人类命运共同体这个重大命题，就建设一个更加美好的世界聆听各方意见。	
I will visit the United Nations Office at Geneva with the following goals in mind: reviewing our shared historical journey, championing the widely accepted principles of diplomacy, exploring ways to realize the vision of building a community of shared future for mankind, and seeking ideas on how we can make the world a better place.
世界卫生组织是负责卫生事务的联合国专门机构，为完善全球卫生治理、维护世界人民健康作出了重要贡献。卫生既是中国发展的重要方面，又是中国对外合作的重点领域。中国同世界卫生组织的合作，提升了中国卫生与健康事业水平，也对全球卫生事业作出了贡献。我期待着同陈冯富珍总干事就中国同世界卫生组织合作充分交换意见。	
The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized UN agency dedicated to global health issues. It has done its best to improve global health governance and safeguard the well-being of all people. Health is a high priority on China' s development agenda and a key area of its international cooperation. Cooperation with the WHO has helped to improve China' s national health programs and represents a contribution to global health endeavors. I look forward to an extensive discussion with Director General Margaret Chan on this subject.
国际奥林匹克运动走过了100多年的历程，对实现人的全面发展，增进各国人民友谊，推动世界和平、发展、进步事业发挥了积极作用。中国始终是奥林匹克运动的积极支持者和参与者，举办了2008年北京奥运会、残奥会和2014年南京青奥会，正在积极筹办2022年北京冬奥会、冬残奥会。我很高兴有机会访问国际奥委会，听取巴赫主席和国际奥委会关于弘扬奥林匹克精神、推进奥林匹克运动的意见。	
The International Olympic Movement, in its over 100 years, has played a positive role in enhancing all-round human development, deepening friendship between nations and promoting peace, development and progress. China, a long-time supporter and member of the Olympic Movement, has hosted the Beijing 2008 Olympic and Paralympic Games and the Nanjing 2014 Youth Olympic Games, and is actively preparing for the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. I am glad to visit the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and learn from President Thomas Bach and the IOC their ideas about promoting the Olympic spirit and advancing the Olympic Movement.
我期待着在瑞士同各方人士共商合作、共议创新，推动中瑞关系、中欧关系、中国同联合国的关系、中国同奥林匹克运动的关系在新的一年迎来更好发展。	
In short, I look forward to my upcoming trip to Switzerland, where I will meet people from different walks of life to promote cooperation and innovation. Hopefully, the trip will give a strong impetus to China' s relations with Switzerland, Europe, the UN and the Olympic Movement in the year ahead.
