67. 习近平在哈萨克斯坦媒体发表署名文章《为中哈关系插上梦想的翅膀》
为中哈关系插上梦想的翅膀
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
May China-Kazakhstan Relationship Fly High Toward Our Shared Aspirations
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
六月仲夏，万物繁盛。在这美好的季节，应纳扎尔巴耶夫总统邀请，我即将第三次访问哈萨克斯坦，并出席上海合作组织峰会和阿斯塔纳专项世博会开幕式。哈萨克斯坦辽阔壮美的草原、蜿蜒奔腾的河流、日新月异的建设、热情淳朴的人民给我留下深刻印象。即将再次踏上这片美丽的热土，我心中充满期待。	
In this lovely mid-summer month of June when all living things are flourishing, I will be traveling to Kazakhstan at the invitation of President Nursultan Nazarbayev. This will be my third visit to your country. I will attend the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) annual summit and the opening ceremony of Expo 2017 Astana. In this connection, I cannot but recall the fond memories of the magnificent Kazakh steppe, vibrant rivers, the phenomenal national development, and most of all, the warm-hearted and sincere Kazakh people. I very much look forward to returning to your beautiful land.
今年适逢中哈建交25周年。在这四分之一世纪里，中哈关系经受住时间和国际风云变幻考验，从建立睦邻友好关系到发展全面战略伙伴关系，再到打造利益共同体和命运共同体，实现了跨越式发展，达到历史最高水平。	
This year marks the 25th anniversary of diplomatic relations between China and Kazakhstan. Over the past quarter of a century, our bilateral relations have withstood the test of time and the ever-changing international situation. Our two countries are not only good neighbors but also comprehensive strategic partners. We are now working together to build a community of shared interests and shared future. Our bilateral relations have moved forward by leaps and bounds and become stronger and closer than ever before.
——中哈政治互信日益牢固。两国尊重对方独立、主权、领土完整和选择的发展道路，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互坚定支持，在国际和地区问题上密切协调和配合。	
- China-Kazakhstan political mutual trust has grown stronger. Our two countries respect each other's independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and choice of development path. We have firmly supported each other on issues vital to our respective core interests, and worked in close coordination and collaboration on international and regional issues.
——中哈务实合作不断加深。中国是哈萨克斯坦最主要的贸易和投资伙伴之一，累计对哈萨克斯坦投资超过428亿美元，贷款超过500亿美元。2017年1－4月，双边贸易额增长45.6%。哈萨克斯坦对华出口不断扩大，面粉、植物油、大豆、肉类、蜂蜜已经走上中国普通百姓餐桌。双方共确定51个产能合作项目，对支持哈萨克斯坦工业化进程和扩大就业具有重要意义。中哈原油管道累计对华输油1亿吨，中哈天然气管道累计对华输气1830亿立方米，双方正积极探讨核电、风电、光伏等新能源合作。每周有50多个航班往来于两国之间。2016年，中国过境哈萨克斯坦的中欧货运班列超过1200列，中哈铁路运输量达820多万吨，集装箱运量大幅增长2倍多。今年2月，哈萨克斯坦小麦首次实现过境中国向东南亚出口。	
-- China-Kazakhstan practical cooperation has deepened continuously. China ranks among Kazakhstan's top trading partners and investors. Chinese investment in Kazakhstan amounted to over 42.8 billion U.S. dollars. China's lending to Kazakhstan has exceeded 50 billion U.S. dollars on an accumulative basis. Our two-way trade of the first four months of 2017 surged by 45.6 percent. Kazakhstan's exports to China are on the rise. Kazakh wheat flour, vegetable oil, soybean, meat products and honey have made their way to the dinning table in more and more Chinese households. Our two countries have identified and agreed on 51 projects of industrial capacity cooperation which will help promote Kazakhstan's industrialization and create more jobs for the Kazakh people. Kazakhstan has exported 100 million tons of oil to China via the China-Kazakhstan crude oil pipeline, and 183 billion cubic meters of gas to my country through the natural gas pipelines. Our two countries are exploring opportunities for cooperation on new energy including nuclear, wind and photovoltaic power. There are over 50 flights between us every week. In 2016, more than 1,200 Europe-bound China Railway Express trains transited through Kazakhstan, and rail freight handled by our railways reached 8.2 million tons and the number of freight containers increased by more than two-fold. This February saw the first freight of Kazakh wheat exported to Southeast Asia via China.
——中哈人文交流更加紧密。2016年，两国人员往来近50万人次，哈萨克斯坦在华留学生1.4万人。哈萨克斯坦已开设5所孔子学院和7家孔子课堂，4所哈萨克斯坦中心落户中国高校。哈萨克斯坦歌手迪马希在中国家喻户晓，《舌尖上的中国》、《温州一家人》等中国优秀影视剧走进万千哈萨克斯坦民众家庭。	
-- China-Kazakhstan people-to-people and cultural exchanges have grown closer. In 2016, nearly 500,000 mutual visits were made between our two countries, and 14,000 Kazakh students were studying in China. Five Confucius Institutes and seven Confucius Classrooms have been set up in Kazakhstan while four Kazakhstan Centers have been inaugurated in Chinese universities. The Kazakh singer Dimash Kudaibergen is now a household name in China. Popular Chinese films or TV series, such as A Bite of China or Family On the Go, have captivated more and more Kazakh viewers.
2013年，我首次访问哈萨克斯坦期间提出建设丝绸之路经济带倡议，“一带一路”合作由此发端。4年来，共建“一带一路”逐渐从倡议转变为行动，从理念转化为实践，成为开放包容的国际合作平台和受到国际社会普遍欢迎的全球公共产品。	
It was during my first visit to Kazakhstan back in 2013 that I proposed the initiative of the Silk Road Economic Belt, which started the process of Belt and Road cooperation. Over the past four years, the Belt and Road Initiative has gradually developed from a proposal to actions, and from a concept to practice. The initiative offers an open and inclusive platform of cooperation and has become a global public good well received by the international community.
当前，国际形势深刻复杂演变，世界经济在深度调整中缓慢复苏，发展问题依然严峻，“一带一路”建设为我们创造了前所未有的历史机遇。上个月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举行，与会各方一致认为，要通过加强国际合作和对接彼此发展战略，实现优势互补，促进共同发展。	
The international situation is undergoing profound and complex changes. The world economy is slowly recovering amid deep-going readjustment. Global development remains a daunting challenge. In this context, the building of the Belt and Road brings us unprecedented historic opportunities. Last month, the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was successfully held in Beijing. The countries represented at the forum agreed to work more closely together to synergize development strategies for greater complementarity and common development.
我这次访问哈萨克斯坦的主要任务，是同纳扎尔巴耶夫总统就新形势下如何更好推进中哈全面战略伙伴关系、推动中哈全方位合作加速发展深入交换意见，作出全面部署。我们真诚希望中哈共同发展繁荣之路越走越宽，越走越顺。	
The primary task of my upcoming visit is to have in-depth discussions with President Nazarbayev on how best the two countries can advance China-Kazakhstan comprehensive strategic partnership under the new circumstances, accelerate our cooperation in all areas and come up with an overall action plan for that purpose. It is my sincere hope that China-Kazakhstan win-win cooperation for common development and prosperity will grow from strength to strength and have a brighter future.
——我们要推进共建“一带一路”合作，加快发展战略对接，共同落实“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成果。进一步释放口岸、交通、物流合作潜力，加快新亚欧大陆桥、中国－中亚－西亚经济走廊和“双西公路”项目建设，促进互联互通和贸易便利化。探索更加灵活有效的投资和融资模式，扩大双边本币结算，为中哈合作项目提供支持。	
-- We need to promote cooperation in jointly building the Belt and Road. We need to synergize our development strategies in a faster pace and work together to implement the outcomes of the Belt and Road Forum. We need to further unlock the potentials for cooperation on ports, transportation and logistics, speed up the construction of such projects as the New Eurasian Land Bridge, the China-Central and Western Asia Economic Corridor and the Western Europe-Western China Road so as to promote connectivity and trade facilitation. We should also identify investment and financing models that are more flexible and effective, and expand trade settlements in local currencies in support of our bilateral cooperation projects.
——我们要将产能合作打造成中哈合作新增长极，加快实施双方已确定的早期收获项目，继续发挥好产能和投资合作对话会机制，保持有效信息沟通和政策协调，为两国企业在对方国家发展营造良好营商环境。	
-- We need to make industrial capacity cooperation a new area of growth in China-Kazakhstan cooperation. We need to accelerate the implementation of the agreed early-harvest projects, continue to leverage the role of the existing mechanism of dialogue on investment and industrial cooperation and maintain close contact on information exchange and policy coordination in an effort to provide a sound business environment for our companies operating in each other's country.
——我们要大力发展高技术和创新合作，深化航空航天、数字经济、新能源等前沿领域合作，推动大数据、云计算、智慧城市建设，加快信息技术和电子商务领域合作，努力实现创新驱动发展，推动中哈合作向更高质量迈进。	
-- We need to vigorously promote high-tech and innovation cooperation. We need to deepen cooperation in frontier areas such as aerospace and aviation, digital economy and new energy. We also need to advance the development of big data, cloud computing and smart city, and speed up cooperation in IT industries and e-commerce. We will endeavor to bring about an innovation-driven development so as to upgrade China-Kazakhstan cooperation to a new level.
——我们要打造中哈民心相通工程，更积极推动人员交往和文化交流，通过互设文化中心、联合创办高校、交换影视文学作品等方式增进彼此了解和认同。中方鼓励更多中国公民赴哈萨克斯坦旅游观光，感受“伟大草原之国”独特魅力。	
-- We need to develop programs that help bring our people closer. We will work more actively to promote people-to-people and cultural exchanges. We should promote mutual understanding and mutual appreciation between our people through the establishment of cultural centers in each other's country, the joint operation of institutions of higher education and the exchange of films, television programs and literature works. China will encourage more visits of its citizens to Kazakhstan for tourism so that they will see for themselves the unparalleled beauty of this "Uly Dala Eli," the land of the great steppe.
——我们要深入开展安全合作，践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，依法打击“三股势力”、贩毒、跨国有组织犯罪，共同维护网络安全。加快建立共建“一带一路”双边安保机制，保障两国油气管线及大型合作项目安全，保护两国公民和企业合法权益和人身财产安全。	
-- We need to deepen our security cooperation. We will implement the vision for common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We will continue to combat terrorism, separatism and extremism, drug trafficking and transnational organized crimes according to law and jointly safeguard the cyber security. We should put in place bilateral security mechanisms for the Belt and Road cooperation to ensure the security of the oil and gas pipelines and other large cooperation projects undertaken by our two countries. We will protect the legitimate rights and interests and the personal and property safety of our citizens and companies.
——我们要密切国际和多边领域合作，加强在联合国、上海合作组织、亚信等多边框架内沟通和协调，及时就国际和地区热点问题交换意见。中方支持哈萨克斯坦作为2017－2018年联合国安理会非常任理事国在国际事务中发挥更大作用。	
-- We need to strengthen our cooperation at the international and multilateral levels. We will enhance communication and coordination under such multilateral frameworks as the United Nations (UN), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) and maintain timely exchange of views on international and regional hotspot issues. China supports Kazakhstan's greater role in international affairs in its capacity as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council for the 2017-2018 term.
我这次在哈萨克斯坦的另一项重要日程是出席上海合作组织阿斯塔纳峰会。今年是《上海合作组织宪章》签署15周年和《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》签署10周年。长期以来，成员国坚定遵循这两份重要文件确定的宗旨和原则，弘扬互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”，不断巩固互信，扎实推进各领域合作，为促进地区稳定和繁荣作出了重要贡献。	
Another important item on my agenda in Kazakhstan is to attend the SCO annual summit in Astana. This year marks the 15th anniversary of the SCO Charter and the 10th anniversary of the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation of the SCO Member States. Over the years, the SCO member states have been firmly committed to the purposes and principles enshrined in the two important documents. We have never failed to honor and promote the "Shanghai Spirit" featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diverse civilizations and pursuit of common development. As a result, the mutual trust among the SCO member states is stronger and solid progress has been made in SCO cooperation in all areas. All this has contributed significantly to regional stability and prosperity.
上海合作组织高度重视安全合作，建立了打击“三股势力”、毒品及跨国有组织犯罪的合作机制，定期举行联合反恐演习，积极推进有关热点问题解决，有效维护了地区安全和稳定。	
The SCO finds security cooperation extremely important and has put in place cooperation mechanisms on combating terrorism, separatism, extremism, drugs and transnational crimes. The member states have held joint counter-terrorism drills on a regular basis, and worked actively to address hotspot issues. All these efforts have helped to maintain regional security and stability.
上海合作组织签署和认真落实成员国多边经贸合作纲要、本组织至2025年发展战略等文件，稳步推进贸易、投资、互联互通、能源、金融、农业等领域合作，不断深化文化、教育、青年、卫生、科技、环保、旅游、体育等方面交流，为各国经济社会发展和相互友好合作提供了有益助力。	
The SCO member states have implemented in earnest the Programme of Multilateral Trade and Economic Cooperation of the SCO Member States and the Development Strategy of the SCO Until 2025, and steadily moved forward cooperation in such areas as trade, investment, connectivity, energy, finance and agriculture. The SCO has also worked actively to deepen member states' exchanges in culture, education, youth, health, science and technology, environmental protection, tourism and sports. Such endeavors have helped to boost economic and social development in the member states and enhance friendship and cooperation.
哈萨克斯坦担任上海合作组织轮值主席国以来，为推动本组织发展作出了积极贡献。在即将举行的阿斯塔纳峰会上，成员国元首将就深化各领域合作以及完成本组织首次扩员进程作出重要决定，为本组织下一步发展奠定坚实基础。中方将在本次峰会后接任轮值主席国，愿同哈方及其他成员国一道努力，以阿斯塔纳峰会为新起点，推动上海合作组织实现新发展，更好造福地区各国人民。	
As the rotating chair of the SCO, Kazakhstan has contributed significantly to the organization and its development. At the upcoming Astana summit, heads of the member states will make a number of important decisions on deepening cooperation in all fields and completing the organization's first membership expansion. These decisions will reinforce the organization's position for future development. China will succeed Kazakhstan as the rotating chair upon conclusion of this summit. China stands ready to work with Kazakhstan and other member states and build on the Astana summit to further strengthen the organization so that it will deliver more tangible benefits to people in this region.
2017阿斯塔纳专项世博会即将开幕，这是中亚国家首次举办世博会，“未来能源”主题顺应世界经济绿色、健康、可持续发展潮流，同中方打造“绿色丝绸之路”倡议高度契合。
The Expo 2017 Astana, the first of its kind in a Central Asian country, will be opening soon. Its theme "Future Energy" is very much in line with global trend toward a green, healthy and sustainable economic growth and highly compatible with China's initiative on a green Silk Road.
中方支持哈萨克斯坦将这次世博会办出特色、办出水平，中国馆将展示“人造太阳”核聚变、高铁模拟驾驶舱等最新技术，倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的生产和生活方式，为践行绿色发展理念贡献中国智慧。我预祝阿斯塔纳专项世博会取得圆满成功！	
China supports Kazakhstan in hosting a successful and distinctive Expo. The China Pavilion will showcase state-of-the-art technologies such as an "artificial minisun" using nuclear fusion and a high-speed rail cockpit simulator. Our pavilion aims to promote a green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable way of life and production, and demonstrate China's vision on green development. I wish the Astana Expo a complete success!
哈萨克斯坦独立以来，在纳扎尔巴耶夫总统卓越领导下，保持社会和谐稳定和经济快速发展，人民生活水平和幸福指数显著提高，综合国力不断增强，跻身全球竞争力50强之列，创造了“哈萨克斯坦奇迹”。	
Under President Nazarbayev's outstanding leadership, Kazakhstan has maintained social harmony and stability and achieved rapid economic growth since its independence. The Kazakh people are living better and happier lives. Thanks to the steady growth of its aggregate national strength, Kazakhstan now ranks among the world's 50 most competitive countries, creating the "Kazakhstan miracle."
当前，哈萨克斯坦正以第三次现代化为引领，加快推进“光明之路”新经济政策、“2050战略”、社会意识现代化改革，哈萨克斯坦人民正朝着实现民族振兴、国家富强的“哈萨克斯坦梦”阔步前进。中国人民也在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标和中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。共同的期盼、共同的梦想将中哈两国人民紧密连接在一起，两国人民正同心筑梦，并肩追梦，携手圆梦。	
Going all out in its third modernization drive, Kazakhstan is pressing ahead with its new economic policy of the "Nurly Zhol," the "Strategy-2050" and its social modernization. The Kazakh people are making great strides towards the "Kazakh dream" of national renewal and prosperity. The Chinese people are also making unremitting efforts to achieve the country's "two centenary goals" (i.e., to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects when the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary and turn China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious when the People's Republic of China marks its centennial) and realize the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. The Kazakh and Chinese people, closely bound by our shared aspirations, are joining hands to make their dreams a reality.
我相信，只要我们矢志笃行，中哈关系必将插上梦想的翅膀，飞向更加美好的未来！	
I do believe that as long as we stay true to our goals and work closely together, the China-Kazakhstan relations will fly high toward our shared aspirations and usher in an even better future!
