37. 习近平在阿根廷媒体发表署名文章《开创中阿关系新时代》
开创中阿关系新时代
Opening up a New Era in China-Argentina Relations
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
在南半球充满希望的阳春时节，我很高兴应毛里西奥·马克里总统邀请，出席二十国集团领导人布宜诺斯艾利斯峰会，并对阿根廷共和国进行国事访问。
It gives me great pleasure to attend the G20 Buenos Aires Summit and pay a state visit to the Argentine Republic at the invitation of President Mauricio Macri in the promising season of spring in the southern hemisphere. 
“海内存知己，天涯若比邻。”中阿两国虽然相距遥远，但两国人民热爱和平，相知相守。两国关系经历了国际风云变幻考验，成为新兴市场国家和发展中国家团结合作、共同发展的典范。
As an ancient Chinese poem reads, "If you have a friend afar who knows your heart, distance cannot keep you two apart." The peace-loving people of China and Argentina have rendered each other mutual understanding and support, the geographical distance between us notwithstanding. And our bilateral relations have stood the test of changing international circumstances and set an example of solidarity and cooperation for common development between two emerging economies and developing countries. 
——中阿是相互信任的好朋友。短短两年多来，我同马克里总统4次会晤，就双边关系发展达成重要共识，也感受到双方对发展中阿关系的高度重视。中方坚定支持阿根廷探索符合本国国情的发展道路，对阿根廷未来发展充满信心。目前，中阿政府间常设委员会、经济合作与协调战略对话、议会政治对话委员会、经济贸易混合委员会等机制运行顺畅，为两国关系不断取得新进展注入了强劲动力。中阿在尊重主权、维护领土完整等问题上也始终相互支持。
-- China and Argentina are good friends who trust each other. During our four meetings in a short span of two years, President Macri and I reached important agreement on ways to grow bilateral relations and we are united in placing enormous importance on China-Argentina relations. China firmly supports Argentina in exploring a development path suited to its national conditions and has every confidence about its future. Bilateral mechanisms such as the inter-governmental permanent committee, the strategic dialogue for economic cooperation and coordination, the parliamentary political dialogue committee and the mixed commission on economic and trade cooperation have been operating smoothly, injecting strong impetus into continued progress of bilateral ties. Our two countries have also supported each other on issues of respecting sovereignty and upholding territorial integrity. 
——中阿是共同发展的好伙伴。目前，中国是阿根廷第二大贸易伙伴、第一大农产品出口目的地国。2017年，双边贸易额138亿美元，与建交时相比，增长近2300倍。阿根廷新鲜水果、牛肉、红酒、海产品等受到中国消费者欢迎。中国在阿根廷投资超过100亿美元，涵盖基础设施建设、能源、通信、农业等领域，创造了数以万计的工作岗位。中国制造、中国技术助力阿根廷更好实现互联互通，提高竞争力。中阿扩大本币互换规模，中国金融机构在阿根廷设立分支机构，金融合作为阿根廷经济社会发展提供了支持和服务。
-- China and Argentina are good partners of common development. China is Argentina's second largest trading partner and largest destination of its agricultural exports. In 2017 two-way trade reached US$13.8 billion, up by nearly 2,300 times since the establishment of diplomatic relations. Fresh fruit, beef, red wine and seafood from Argentina are well liked by Chinese consumers. China has invested over US$10 billion in Argentina in sectors such as infrastructure, energy, communications and agriculture, creating tens of thousands of local jobs. Chinese products and technologies have contributed to Argentina's pursuit of greater connectivity and competitiveness. Our two countries have increased the scale of local currency swaps. Chinese financial institutions have opened branches in Argentina. Such financial cooperation has provided support and services for Argentina's economic and social development. 
——中阿是兼收并蓄的好知音。阿根廷人有引以为豪的两双脚，一双用来踢足球，另一双用来跳探戈。当前，不少阿根廷球员和教练加盟中国足球联赛，成批次的中国青少年赴阿根廷接受足球训练。中国很多城市成立了探戈舞协会和俱乐部，中国选手参加探戈世界锦标赛并屡屡获奖。“中国热”、“汉语热”在阿根廷热度不减。文学巨匠博尔赫斯在《漆手杖》等作品中多次提及庄周梦蝶、长城等中国元素，并且有一根心爱的中国漆手杖。今年，超过80万人次的阿根廷民众参加了在当地举行的春节庙会，孔子学院和公立全日制中西双语学校更是座无虚席。双方还在不断优化航班衔接，便利更多中国游客领略阿根廷冰川、瀑布、高乔文化的魅力。
-- China and Argentina are close friends that admire each other's achievements and value mutual learning. There are two passions for Argentinians, both centering on movements of the feet. One is football, and the other is tango. Argentine football players and coaches have joined Chinese football leagues. And groups of young Chinese have received football training in Argentina. There are tango dance associations and clubs in many Chinese cities. And Chinese dancers have competed and won medals in world tango tournaments. Among Argentinians, there is an abiding interest in China and the Chinese language. The literary legend Jorge Luis Borges used Chinese allusions such as the butterfly dream of the philosopher Chuang Tzu and the Great Wall in his works, including The Paint Cane. And he indeed had a cherished Chinese paint cane in his possession. More than 800,000 Argentinians participated in Spring Festival temple fairs held in local communities early this year. The Confucius Institutes and full-time public schools that teach in both Chinese and Spanish languages are packed with students. Our two sides are also working on ways to make flight connections more convenient for Chinese tourists to travel to Argentina and appreciate the charm of glaciers, waterfalls, and the gaucho culture. 
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局。世界多极化、经济全球化势头不可阻挡，日益频发的全球性挑战也不容忽视。中阿两国正处于各自发展的关键阶段。中国人民正在为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力，阿根廷人民也在为实现发展振兴的阿根廷梦而努力。让我们抓住历史机遇，顺应时代潮流，携手开创中阿全面战略伙伴关系新时代，更好造福两国人民。
The world we live in today has been undergoing tremendous changes which are unseen in a century. While the momentum of multi-polarity and economic globalization is unstoppable, rising global challenges have also emerged. Both China and Argentina are at a crucial stage of development. The Chinese people are making unremitting efforts to realize the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. And the Argentine people are striving to realize the Argentine dream of development and revitalization. Let us seize historical opportunities, move forward with the times, and join hands to open up a new era in China-Argentina comprehensive strategic partnership to the greater benefit of our peoples. 
第一，加强战略沟通，坚持互尊互信。以更广阔的视野谋划两国关系发展蓝图，加强政府、议会、政党、地方等各领域各层级交往，密切治国理政经验交流，不断增进相互了解和政治互信，在事关彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上继续相互坚定支持。
First, we need to strengthen strategic communication based on mutual respect and trust. To grow our bilateral relations, it is important to draw up a blueprint with a broader vision to guide intensified exchanges in various fields between governments, legislatures and political parties and at sub-national levels and to increase the sharing of governance experience. It is important that we enhance mutual understanding and political trust, and give each other continued firm support on matters concerning core interests and major concerns. 
第二，深化务实合作，实现互利双赢。加强两国发展战略对接，共同推进“一带一路”建设。不断深化基础设施建设、能源、农业、矿业、制造业等重点领域合作，推进贸易便利化安排，用好电子商务等合作新模式。我们欢迎阿方继续参加中国国际进口博览会，扩大对华出口。期待更多阿根廷高附加值产品及服务进入中国市场，助力阿根廷从“世界粮仓”向“世界超市”转型。
Second, we need to deepen practical cooperation for win-win results. Efforts need to be made to better synergize our development strategies to take forward the Belt and Road Initiative. Cooperation will be deepened in such key areas as infrastructure, energy, agriculture, mining and manufacturing. Trade facilitation will be promoted and new cooperation models such as e-commerce leveraged. China welcomes Argentina's continued participation in the China International Import Expo and hopes to see more Argentine exports to China. We look forward to more high value-added Argentine products and services in the Chinese market, which will expectedly support Argentina's transformation from the world's granary to supermarket. 
第三，扩大人文交流，加强互学互鉴。鼓励两国民间往来，扩大文化、教育、科技、地方、体育、旅游等领域交流合作，实施更多便利人员往来的措施，分享发展经验，夯实中阿友好民意基础。
Third, we need to expand people-to-people exchanges for mutual learning. More people-to-people interactions will be encouraged, and cooperation in culture, education, science and technology, sports and tourism and at sub-national levels expanded. More measures may be introduced to facilitate personnel flows and share development experience. All this will contribute to stronger public support for China-Argentina friendship. 
第四，增强协调配合，继续互帮互助。加强双方在联合国、二十国集团、世界贸易组织、七十七国集团等多边框架内协作，支持经济全球化和多边贸易体制，维护新兴市场国家和广大发展中国家根本利益，为维护世界和平、建设开放型世界经济、推动构建人类命运共同体作出应有贡献。
Fourth, we need to enhance coordination and collaboration for mutual support. Coordination under multilateral frameworks will be strengthened, including at the United Nations, G20, WTO and the Group of 77, to underline support for economic globalization and the multilateral trading system and safeguard the fundamental interests of emerging markets and developing countries. Together, we will make our contributions to maintaining world peace and building an open world economy and a community with a shared future for mankind. 
中阿关系全面快速发展正是中拉关系蓬勃生机的缩影。中拉是发展中国家和新兴市场国家的重要代表，都面临前所未有的机遇和挑战。我们需要深化合作，携手共进。为此，我提出构建中拉命运共同体，倡议中拉描绘共建“一带一路”新蓝图，得到拉美和加勒比朋友们积极响应。我们愿同拉美和加勒比国家一道，秉持共商共建共享原则，以政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通为合作重点，通过共建“一带一路”给中拉人民带来更多实惠，促进中拉合作优化升级、创新发展。
The all-round, fast growth of China-Argentina relations is an epitome of the vibrant relations between China and countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. China and Latin American and Caribbean countries, as important developing countries and emerging markets, all face unprecedented opportunities and challenges. It is therefore important for us to deepen cooperation and make progress with concerted efforts. This is why I have called for forging a community with a shared future and formulating a new blueprint for Belt and Road cooperation between China, Latin American and Caribbean countries. Both initiatives have been warmly received by friends from countries in the region. Guided by the principle of consultation, collaboration and benefit for all, China is ready to work with Latin American and Caribbean countries to promote connectivity in the five priority areas as policy, infrastructure, trade, finance and people-to-people ties. All this will help translate our Belt and Road cooperation into more tangible benefits for our peoples, and facilitate cooperation upgrading and the fostering of new growth areas in our relations. 
今年是二十国集团领导人峰会启动10周年。经过10年历程，二十国集团在应对国际金融危机、推动世界经济复苏方面成绩斐然，成为世界经济的稳定器、全球经济治理的推进器。二十国集团要继续发挥国际经济合作主要论坛作用，落实历届峰会共识，引领世界经济前进方向。中方将在“为公平与可持续发展凝聚共识”主题引领下，全力支持阿方举办一届成功峰会，也对这次峰会充满期待。
This year marks the 10th anniversary of the G20 Summit. A decade on, the G20, with its remarkable achievements in coping with the international financial crisis and promoting global recovery, has become an anchor of the world economy and a propeller for global economic governance. It is vital for the G20 to maintain its role as a premier forum on international economic cooperation, follow through on the consensus of previous summits, and chart the course for the world economy. Following the theme of "Building Consensus for Fair and Sustainable Development", China will give its full support to Argentina in hosting a successful G20 Summit, for which we are full of expectations. 
希望二十国集团继续秉持同舟共济的伙伴精神。这种精神曾指引二十国集团走过国际金融危机风雨，也将继续鼓舞二十国集团引领世界经济浪潮。携手引领世界经济在正确轨道上发展，既是二十国集团成立初心所在，也是二十国集团最重要任务。我们既要加强宏观政策协调和合作，更要旗帜鲜明地维护多边贸易体制，推动构建开放型世界经济。
We hope the G20 will stay committed to the spirit of solidarity and partnership. As it has been instrumental in steering the G20 through the storms of the international financial crisis, this very spirit will continue to inspire the G20 in staying ahead of the curve of the world economy. Jointly moving the world economy forward on the right track is the founding mission and the primary task of the G20. We need to strengthen macro policy coordination and cooperation, and more importantly, we need to unequivocally uphold the multilateral trading system and build an open world economy. 
希望二十国集团继续促进经济全球化发展进程。马克里总统倡导二十国集团要本着“以人民为中心”的指导思想开展合作，中方对此高度赞赏。经济全球化为世界经济增长提供了强劲动力，促进了商品和资本流动、科技和文明进步、各国人民交往。对经济全球化进程中出现的问题，我们要主动作为、适度管理，从构建人类命运共同体出发，践行共商共建共享理念，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢方向发展，确保所有国家和人民都能受益。
We hope the G20 will continue to advance the process of economic globalization. China highly commends the people-centered vision for G20 cooperation as championed by President Macri. Economic globalization has provided a robust driving force for global growth and enabled flows of goods and capital, advances in science and technology, progress of civilizations, and interactions between people of different countries. As for the problems that have arisen in this process, we need to take a proactive and measured approach, act in the interest of building a community with a shared future for mankind, and pursue a more open, inclusive and balanced economic globalization in line with the principle of consultation, collaboration and benefit for all in order to serve the interests of people of all countries. 
希望二十国集团继续引领创新增长、长效治理的发展路径。新技术、新业态带来的机遇和挑战并存。各国需要继续通过创新挖掘世界经济增长新动力，推动数字经济、新工业革命深入发展，也要关注创新给社会就业带来的风险挑战，增强劳动者适应技术变革的能力。我们要继续把发展问题置于全球宏观政策协调的突出位置，讨论各领域国际合作都要始终纳入发展视角，照顾发展中国家关切，维护发展中国家发展空间。我们要支持基础设施互联互通建设，帮助发展中国家突破发展瓶颈，实现可持续发展。
We hope the G20 will continue to take the lead in shaping paths toward innovation-driven growth and long-term governance. New technologies and new forms of business have created both opportunities and challenges. Countries need to foster new drivers for global growth through innovation, and build up the momentum of the digital economy and the new industrial revolution. As innovation may cause risks and challenges for employment, it is important to better equip our workers with the capacity to adapt to technological transformation. We need to continue to put development front and center in global macro policy coordination, and keep in mind the need for development throughout our discussions of international cooperation in all areas. The concerns of developing countries should be accommodated and their development space preserved. Efforts should be made to support infrastructure connectivity and help developing countries break growth bottlenecks and achieve sustainable development.
