2. 习近平在第十七届中国－东盟博览会和中国－东盟商务与投资峰会开幕式上的致辞
在第十七届中国－东盟博览会和中国－东盟商务与投资峰会开幕式上的致辞
（2020年11月27日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the 17th China-ASEAN Expo and
China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit
27 November 2020
尊敬的各国领导人，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Leaders of Participating Countries,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
值此第十七届中国－东盟博览会、中国－东盟商务与投资峰会开幕之际，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对参加本次大会的线上线下所有嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎和诚挚的问候！
As the 17th China-ASEAN Expo (CAEXPO) and China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit (CABIS) open today, I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and also in my own name, a hearty welcome and warm greetings to all the guests attending in person or via the Internet.
本届中国－东盟博览会以“共建‘一带一路’，共兴数字经济”为主题，就是要深化中国－东盟数字经济合作，推动共建“一带一路”高质量发展，为双方经济社会发展注入新活力。
This year’s CAEXPO, themed “Building the Belt and Road, Strengthening Digital Economy Cooperation”, aims to deepen China-ASEAN cooperation on the digital economy, promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, and inject new vitality into the economic and social development of both sides.
中国和东盟山水相连、血脉相亲，友好关系源远流长。2013年，我提出愿同东盟国家共建21世纪海上丝绸之路，携手共建更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体。
China and ASEAN countries, connected by the same mountains and rivers, share close affinity and a longstanding friendship. In 2013, I announced an initiative for China to work with ASEAN countries for a 21st Century Maritime Silk Road and for a closer China-ASEAN community with a shared future.
我们高兴地看到，7年来，双方互联互通不断加速，经济融合持续加深，经贸合作日益加快，人文交往更加密切，中国－东盟关系成为亚太区域合作中最为成功和最具活力的典范，成为推动构建人类命运共同体的生动例证。
We are glad to note that, seven years on, China and ASEAN enjoy growing connectivity, deepening economic integration, robust business ties, and closer people-to-people exchanges. The China-ASEAN relationship has grown into the most successful and vibrant model for cooperation in the Asia-Pacific and an exemplary effort in building a community with a shared future for mankind.
面对今年突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情，双方守望相助，共克时艰，就分享抗疫经验，推进抗疫物资供应，合作研发疫苗，共同维护地区产业链、供应链稳定等达成诸多重要共识。在中国抗疫关键时刻，东盟国家及时给予中方宝贵支持和无私援助。中国在国内疫情趋于稳定后，向东盟国家派出医疗专家组，提供物资和技术援助，分享抗疫经验，及时开通双方人员和物资往来“快捷通道”和“绿色通道”。
When confronted by the sudden onslaught of COVID-19 this year, China and ASEAN have helped each other and took on the challenge in solidarity. We have reached important consensus in many respects, including sharing experience on COVID-19 response, ensuring medical supplies, conducting joint research and development of vaccines, and keeping the regional industrial and supply chains stable. At a crucial stage in China’s fight against the coronavirus, ASEAN countries promptly provided invaluable support and selfless assistance to China. Once the situation began to ease on its domestic front, China sent expert teams to ASEAN countries, offered material and technical assistance, shared containment experience, and speedily opened “fast tracks” and “green lanes” to facilitate the flow of people and goods.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局，世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，各国人民的命运从未像今天这样紧密相连。同时，世界面临的不稳定不确定因素正在增加，全球经济低迷，单边主义、保护主义抬头，网络安全、重大传染性疾病、气候变化等非传统安全威胁持续蔓延，国际秩序和全球治理体系受到冲击。
Our world is undergoing momentous changes unseen in a century. It is moving toward greater multi-polarity, economic globalization and cultural diversity, and is becoming increasingly information-oriented. Never before have the destinies of people in different countries been so closely connected. At the same time, however, the world is faced with growing uncertainties and instability. The world economy is sluggish; unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise; cyber security issues, major infectious diseases, climate change, and many other non-traditional security threats continue to spread; and the international order and global governance system are being challenged.
新形势下，中方视东盟为周边外交优先方向和高质量共建“一带一路”重点地区，支持东盟共同体建设，支持东盟在东亚合作中的中心地位，支持东盟在构建开放包容的地区架构中发挥更大作用。
Under the new circumstances, China continues to regard ASEAN as a priority in its neighborhood diplomacy and a key region in high-quality Belt and Road cooperation. China supports ASEAN’s community-building, supports ASEAN centrality in East Asian cooperation, and supports ASEAN in playing a bigger role in building an open and inclusive regional architecture.
中方愿同东盟一道，在《中国－东盟战略伙伴关系2030年愿景》指导下，推进各领域合作，维护本地区繁荣发展良好势头，建设更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体。为此，我愿提出4点倡议。
China will work with ASEAN to advance all-round cooperation under the guidance of the Strategic Partnership Vision 2030. Such efforts will help maintain the good momentum for development and prosperity in our region and cultivate a closer China-ASEAN community with a shared future. For that to happen, let me make the following suggestions on what we need to do:
第一，提升战略互信，深入对接发展规划。中方愿同东盟一道，按照《落实中国－东盟战略伙伴关系联合宣言的行动计划（2021－2025）》，推进未来5年各领域合作；落实《中国－东盟关于“一带一路”倡议同〈东盟互联互通总体规划2025〉对接合作的联合声明》，依托陆海新通道建设，加强铁路、公路、港口、机场、电力、通信等基础设施互联互通合作，加快推进现有经济走廊和重点项目建设，积极构建中国－东盟多式联运联盟。明年是中国－东盟建立对话关系30周年，中方愿同东盟一道，设计和举办好纪念活动，打造更高水平的战略伙伴关系。
First, we need to enhance strategic mutual trust and further synergize our development plans. China will work with ASEAN to advance our wide-ranging cooperation in the coming five years in line with the Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on China-ASEAN Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity (2021-2025). China will also work with ASEAN to implement the China-ASEAN Joint Statement on Synergizing the Belt and Road Initiative and the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025. To be specific, more efforts will be made to build the New International Land-Sea Trade Corridor, strengthen cooperation on infrastructure connectivity including railways, highways, ports, airports, power and communications, speed up the development of existing economic corridors and key projects, and continue to develop the China-ASEAN Multimodal Transport Alliance. Next year will mark the 30th anniversary of China-ASEAN dialogue relations. China will work with ASEAN on the planning and organization of commemorative events and take our strategic partnership to a higher level.
第二，提升经贸合作，加快地区经济全面复苏。中方愿同东盟各国加强协作，以中国－东盟自由贸易区全面建成10周年为契机，进一步实施好中国－东盟自由贸易协定。中方欢迎《区域全面经济伙伴关系协定》完成签署，希望尽早生效。中方愿同东盟方携手努力，畅通贸易、促进投资，相互开放市场，推动双方产业链、供应链、价值链深度融合。在确保做好疫情防控前提下，采取措施便利人员往来和货物流通。推动澜湄合作、中国－东盟东部增长区合作走深走实。用足用好中国－东盟博览会平台功能，为中国－东盟乃至东亚地区经贸合作全面发展发挥更大作用。
Second, we need to elevate economic and trade cooperation and facilitate an early and full recovery of the regional economy. China will enhance coordination with ASEAN countries, and take the 10th anniversary of the full establishment of the China-ASEAN FTA as an opportunity to further implement our free trade agreement. China welcomes the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and looks forward to its early entry into force. China will work with ASEAN countries to sustain the smooth flow of trade, promote mutual investment, open up markets wider to each other, and foster deeply integrated industrial, supply and value chains. Provided that all necessary COVID-19 containment protocols are duly observed, steps should be taken to facilitate the movement of people and goods. We also need to further deepen and substantiate Lancang-Mekong cooperation and China-BIMP-EAGA cooperation. The CAEXPO should be used fully as a platform with a bigger role to play in promoting all-round economic and trade cooperation between China and ASEAN and in the entire East Asia.
第三，提升科技创新，深化数字经济合作。今年是中国－东盟数字经济合作年，中方愿同东盟各国携手合作，抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革机遇，发挥互补优势，聚焦合作共赢，在智慧城市、5G、人工智能、电子商务、大数据、区块链、远程医疗等领域打造更多新的合作亮点，加强数据安全保护和政策沟通协调，为双方经济社会发展培育更多新动能。中方愿同东盟一道建设中国－东盟信息港，推动数字互联互通，打造“数字丝绸之路”。
Third, we need to enhance innovation in science and technology and deepen cooperation on the digital economy. This year is designated the China-ASEAN Year of Digital Economy Cooperation. China will work with ASEAN countries to seize the opportunities presented by the new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation. We should tap into our complementarity and pursue mutually beneficial cooperation. We could create more highlights of cooperation in such areas as smart city, 5G, artificial intelligence, e-commerce, big data, blockchain and telemedicine, and strengthen the protection of data security and policy communication and coordination, as these efforts will help nurture new drivers for the social and economic development of our two sides. China will work with ASEAN on the China-ASEAN Information Harbor to advance digital connectivity and build a digital Silk Road.
第四，提升抗疫合作，强化公共卫生能力建设。中方愿同东盟开展公共卫生领域政策对话，完善合作机制，携手抗击新冠肺炎疫情，加强信息分享和疫苗生产、研发、使用合作。中方将在疫苗投入使用后积极考虑东盟国家需求，为东盟抗疫基金提供资金支持，共同建设应急医疗物资储备库，建立中国－东盟公共卫生应急联络机制。中方愿实施好“中国－东盟健康丝绸之路人才培养项目（2020－2022）”，为东盟培养1000名卫生行政人员和专业技术人员，提高地区公共卫生服务水平。中国愿同包括东盟国家在内的国际社会加强团结合作，支持世界卫生组织发挥领导作用，共同构建人类卫生健康共同体。
Fourth, we need to strengthen cooperation against COVID-19 and enhance capacity building in public health. China stands ready for policy dialogue on public health with ASEAN to improve cooperation mechanisms. It is important that we join forces in fighting the coronavirus and step up information sharing and cooperation on the production, development, and deployment of vaccines. When its COVID-19 vaccines are available for use, China will actively consider the needs of ASEAN countries. China will provide financial support to the COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund, and work with ASEAN in developing the Regional Reserve of Medical Supplies for Public Health Emergencies and launching a Liaison Mechanism for Public Health Emergencies with ASEAN. China will act on the China-ASEAN Human Resources Training Program of Health Silk Road (2020-2022) to train for ASEAN countries 1,000 administrative and specialized personnel in the health sector, in a bid to help deliver higher quality public health services in the region. China will work with ASEAN countries and other members of the international community through greater solidarity and cooperation to support the World Health Organization in playing a leadership role and to build a global community of health for all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当前，中国统筹疫情防控和经济社会发展取得了重大战略成果，成为世界上第一个恢复经济增长的主要经济体。不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。中国将坚定不移扩大对外开放，增强国内国际经济联动效应，以自身复苏带动世界共同复苏，包括东盟在内的世界各国都将从中受益。放眼未来，中国同东盟合作空间将更为广阔。
China has secured major strategic achievements in coordinating COVID-19 response and economic and social development. It is the first major economy in the world to resume growth. The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. China will stay as committed as ever to further opening-up, and seek greater synergy through the interplay of its domestic and world economies. China will fuel a worldwide recovery with its own economic rebound, and countries around the world, ASEAN members included, will all benefit from it. Looking ahead, China-ASEAN cooperation will enjoy still greater prospects.
中国－东盟博览会、中国－东盟商务与投资峰会是推进区域经济一体化的务实平台，希望双方通过本届盛会，创造更多商机，收获更多成果，携手共创更加繁荣美好的未来。
The CAEXPO and CABIS are a results-oriented platform for us to advance regional economic integration. I hope this year’s gathering will enable China and ASEAN countries to find more business opportunities, reap more fruits, and usher in a brighter future of prosperity.
最后，我衷心祝愿会议取得圆满成功！
To conclude, I wish the CAEXPO and CABIS a full success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
