5. 习近平在亚太经合组织第二十七次领导人非正式会议上的讲话
携手构建亚太命运共同体
Working Together for an Asia-Pacific Community with A Shared Future
——在亚太经合组织第二十七次领导人非正式会议上的发言
（2020年11月20日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the 27th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting
Beijing, 20 November 2020
尊敬的穆希丁总理，
各位同事：
The Right Honorable Prime Minister Tan Sri Muhyiddin Yassin,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴通过视频连线方式同大家相聚，感谢穆希丁总理和马来西亚政府为筹备这次会议作出的努力。
It gives me great pleasure to join you via video link. I wish to thank Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin and the Malaysian government for hosting the meeting.
亚太经合组织成立以来的30多年，是世界格局加速演变、全球治理深刻重塑的30多年，也是亚太地区发生翻天覆地变化的30多年。
The past 30-plus years since the inception of APEC has seen rapid evolution of the international landscape and profound transformation of global governance. It has also witnessed a sea change in the Asia-Pacific region.
30多年来，亚太经合组织合作不断深化，取得长足进展：我们以茂物目标为指引，不断提升区域经济一体化水平。我们推动贸易投资自由化便利化和经济技术合作两个轮子一起转，努力实现优势互补和均衡发展。我们倡导开放的地区主义，探索出自主自愿、协商一致、灵活务实、循序渐进的“APEC方式”。这期间，亚太地区经受住了两次金融危机的考验，10多亿人摆脱贫困，成为世界经济增长中最强劲、最活跃的一个板块，为构建开放型世界经济、支持多边贸易体制、引领经济全球化发挥了积极作用。
Over the past three decades and more, APEC cooperation has kept deepening and made substantial progress on many fronts. Guided by the Bogor Goals, we have steadily enhanced regional economic integration. We have advanced trade and investment liberalization and facilitation in tandem with economic and technical cooperation, with a view to realizing mutual complementarity and balanced development of the “two wheels” of APEC cooperation. We have advocated open regionalism and developed an APEC approach of voluntarism, consensus-building, flexibility, pragmatism and incremental progress. Over the years, the Asia-Pacific has weathered two financial crises and lifted over one billion people out of poverty. It has become a leading and most dynamic powerhouse of the global economy, playing an active role in building an open world economy, upholding the multilateral trading system, and spearheading economic globalization.
当前，世界和亚太正在经历深刻变革，新冠肺炎疫情暴发加速了这一趋势。世界经济陷入低迷，经济全球化遭遇逆风，单边主义、保护主义抬头，公平和效率、增长和分配、技术和就业等矛盾更加突出，贫富差距仍普遍存在，全球治理体系面临新的挑战。亚太地区数十年来第一次出现经济整体负增长，保护人民健康、实现经济复苏任务艰巨。亚太合作未来的路怎么走，关乎地区发展，关乎人民福祉，关乎世界未来。
Three decades on, both the world and the Asia-Pacific are experiencing profound changes, a process further accelerated by COVID-19. The world economy is in the doldrums. Economic globalization is encountering headwinds. Unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise. Balancing equity and efficiency, growth and distribution, and technology and employment is getting more difficult. The wealth gap remains a common sight. The global governance system faces new challenges. For the first time in decades, the Asia-Pacific as a whole registered negative economic growth. Protecting people’s health and reviving the economy are two formidable tasks we have to take on. Where should Asia-Pacific cooperation be heading? The answer bears on the development of our region, the well-being of our people, and the future of the world at large.
今年，亚太经合组织的一项重要任务是开启2020年后的合作愿景，我们达成了共建亚太共同体的目标。我们应该以此为新起点，开启亚太合作新阶段，延续亚太地区强劲发展势头，迎接亚太地区共同繁荣未来，共同构建开放包容、创新增长、互联互通、合作共赢的亚太命运共同体。
One priority on this year’s APEC agenda is to unveil the post-2020 vision, a pathway toward our goal of building an Asia-Pacific community. This should be taken as a new starting point for us to begin another phase in Asia-Pacific cooperation, sustain the strong momentum of development in our region, and embrace a future of shared prosperity. Together, we can build an Asia-Pacific community with a shared future featuring openness and inclusiveness, innovation-driven growth, greater connectivity, and mutually beneficial cooperation.
第一，坚持开放包容。世界经济正如我们身边的太平洋，汇聚千流、连通四海，铸就了浩瀚宽广的胸怀，孕育了波涛澎湃的活力。在平等相待基础上开展合作，在相互尊重基础上化解分歧，是亚太经济发展繁荣的根本。一路走来，亚太经合组织致力于推动区域经济一体化，围绕落实茂物目标取得了长足进展，也在引领多边贸易体制演变上发挥了重要作用。但是，实现自由开放的贸易和投资绝非可以一蹴而就。亚太地区要继续领风气之先，坚决维护和平稳定，坚定捍卫多边主义，坚持构建开放型世界经济，毫不动摇支持以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，促进自由开放的贸易和投资，引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。我们要继续推进区域经济一体化，早日建成亚太自由贸易区。中方欢迎区域全面经济伙伴关系协定完成签署，也将积极考虑加入全面与进步跨太平洋伙伴关系协定。我们在推动自由开放贸易的同时，经济技术合作也不能放松。我们要继续落实亚太经合组织高质量增长战略和包容行动议程，照顾发展中成员关切，特别关注妇女等群体面临的特殊困难，支持中小微企业发展，促进包容和可持续增长。中方将举办包容性贸易和投资研讨会，就贸易和投资政策广泛惠及人民提出建议。我们愿同各方一道把有关建议落到实处。
First, we need to stay open and inclusive. The world economy is like the Pacific Ocean around us — It admits water from various rivers, and connects different parts of the world. As such, it has acquired a vast magnitude and enormous vitality. The approach of pursuing cooperation as equals and resolving differences with mutual respect is what essentially makes economic development and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific possible. Throughout the years, APEC has committed itself to deepening regional economic integration and made significant progress in implementing the Bogor Goals. It has also played an important role in steering the evolution of the multilateral trading system. Yet it must be noted that free and open trade and investment cannot be achieved overnight. It is important that the Asia-Pacific should remain the bellwether in safeguarding peace and stability, upholding multilateralism, and fostering an open world economy. We must stay as determined as ever to support the multilateral trading system with the World Trade Organization at its core, promote free and open trade and investment, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. Continued efforts are needed to press ahead with regional economic integration for the early realization of a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP). China welcomes the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), and will favorably consider joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP).As we continue to work on free and open trade, we should pay no less attention to economic and technical cooperation. We need to further implement the APEC Strategy for Strengthening Quality Growth and the Action Agenda on Advancing Inclusion, and accommodate the concerns of developing members. We need to address in particular the special needs of women and some other communities, and support micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Such efforts will contribute to inclusive and sustainable growth. China will host a seminar on advancing economic inclusion through trade and investment to look for suggestions on how trade and investment policies could deliver broader benefits to people. China looks forward to working with all parties to follow up on those suggestions.
第二，坚持创新增长。数字经济是全球未来的发展方向，创新是亚太经济腾飞的翅膀。我们应该主动把握时代机遇，充分发挥本地区人力资源广、技术底子好、市场潜力大的特点，打造竞争新优势，为各国人民过上更好日子开辟新可能。我们要全面落实亚太经合组织互联网和数字经济路线图，促进新技术传播和运用，加强数字基础设施建设，消除数字鸿沟。我们要完善经济治理，努力营造开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境。中方今年开展智慧城市案例研究，将推动制定智慧城市指导原则，为亚太创新城市发展提供样板。中方提出倡议，推动各方分享数字技术抗疫和恢复经济的经验，倡导优化数字营商环境，激发市场主体活力，释放数字经济潜力，为亚太经济复苏注入新动力。明年，中方还将举办数字减贫研讨会，发挥数字技术优势，助力亚太地区消除贫困事业。
Second, we need to pursue innovation-driven growth. The digital economy represents the future direction of global development, while innovation has fueled the economic takeoff of the Asia-Pacific. We need to proactively seize the opportunities of our times and fully harness our region’s abundant human resources, solid technological foundation, and enormous market potential to gain a new competitive edge and open up new possibilities for the betterment of our people’s lives. The APEC Internet and Digital Economy Roadmap should be implemented in full to spur the dissemination and application of new technologies, strengthen digital infrastructure, and close the digital divide. We need to improve economic governance and foster an open, fair, equitable and non-discriminatory environment for businesses. This year, China has conducted an APEC case study on smart cities, which we hope will contribute to the formulation of guidelines on smart cities and offer an example for innovative urban development across the region. China calls for experience sharing among APEC members on how to control COVID-19 and achieve economic recovery with digital technologies. China also calls for improving the doing-digital-business environment, energizing market players, and tapping the potential of the digital economy. Such efforts will bring fresh impetus to economic recovery in our region. Next year, China will host a workshop on digital technology-enabled poverty alleviation, in a bid to unleash the role of digital technologies in eradicating poverty in our region.
第三，坚持互联互通。互联互通是区域经济一体化的重要基础，也是实现全球联动发展的必要条件，其重要性在疫情背景下就显得更加突出。我们要继续推进落实亚太经合组织互联互通蓝图，畅通人员、货物、资金、数据安全有序流动，实现亚太地区无缝联接。中方已经同印尼、韩国、新加坡等成员开通了疫情期间人员流动“快捷通道”，将继续建设人员流动便利化网络。我们要推动国际防疫健康信息互认。中方愿同各方一起积极稳妥推进货物“绿色通道”建设，提高通关效率，打通堵点、连接断点，推动搭建国际产业链、供应链合作平台，维护全球和地区产业链、供应链安全畅通运转。我们要促进各方发展规划和互联互通倡议彼此对接，形成合力。中方愿同各方携手高质量共建“一带一路”，为亚太互联互通建设搭建更广阔平台，为亚太和世界经济注入更强劲动力。
Third, we need to enhance connectivity. Connectivity is a vital basis of regional economic integration and an essential underpinning for interconnected development of the world. The ongoing pandemic further highlights the importance of connectivity. We need to continue to implement the APEC Connectivity Blueprint to facilitate the smooth, safe and orderly flow of people, goods, capital and data and achieve a seamlessly connected Asia-Pacific. China has opened “fast tracks” with fellow APEC members like Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore to facilitate the movement of people during the pandemic, and more will be done to complete a network of such arrangements. In this connection, it is important to promote the mutual recognition of the COVID-related health information of international travelers. China is ready to take active and well-thought-out steps with all other parties to set up “green lanes”, which will help make customs clearance more efficient, unclog bottlenecks, and reconnect disrupted links. We may also promote the creation of international cooperation platforms on industrial and supply chains to ensure the safe and smooth operation of industrial and supply chains in our region and beyond. We need to pursue greater complementarity among the development plans and connectivity initiatives of different parties to forge a bigger synergy. On China’s part, we hope to work with all partners in high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, which we believe will set up a bigger platform for connectivity in the Asia-Pacific and inject a stronger impetus into the economy of our region and the wider world.
第四，坚持合作共赢。亚太各成员发展高度互补，利益深度融合。亚太经济合作从来不是零和博弈、你输我赢的政治游戏，而是相互成就、互利共赢的发展平台。马来西亚有句谚语，“遇山一起爬，遇沟一起跨”。这正是亚太大家庭精神的精髓。疫情再度告诉我们，只有团结合作，才能战胜挑战。我们要深化互信、包容、合作、共赢的亚太伙伴关系，秉持共商共建共享理念，不断提升区域合作水平，做大亚太合作蛋糕，实现共同繁荣。我们要在协商一致基础上推进务实合作，妥善处理矛盾和分歧，维护亚太合作正确方向，让亚太经合组织行稳致远。
Fourth, we need to promote mutually beneficial cooperation. The Asia-Pacific economies have a high degree of mutual complementarity and enjoy deeply intertwined interests. Our economic cooperation has never been a zero-sum political game in which one gains at the expense of the other. Rather, our cooperation has provided us with a development platform to ensure what we each do can be mutually reinforcing and beneficial to all. There is a Malay proverb that goes, “bukit sama didaki, lurah sama dituruni”, which means to climb the hill together and go down the ravine together. It aptly captures the spirit of our Asia-Pacific family. COVID-19 serves as another reminder that only solidarity and cooperation can enable us to prevail over challenges. We need to deepen the Asia-Pacific partnership featuring mutual trust, inclusiveness and mutually beneficial cooperation and follow the approach of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. We need to keep raising the level and scope of our regional cooperation to achieve shared prosperity for the whole region. It is important that we advance practical cooperation on the basis of consensus, properly manage differences and disagreements, and keep Asia-Pacific cooperation in the right direction to ensure APEC’s sound development in the long run.
应对疫情是当前最紧迫的任务。我们要加强疫苗研发和交流，努力让疫苗成为全球公共产品，促进疫苗在发展中国家的可及性和可负担性。中方已经加入“新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”。中方支持亚太经合组织加强公共卫生、中小微企业等领域政策交流和能力建设，提出远程医疗倡议，让贫困和偏远地区人民得到及时、有效医治，助力抗疫合作和经济复苏。
At this very moment, fighting COVID-19 is the most pressing task for us all. We must step up research and development of vaccines and related exchanges, and work harder to make the vaccines a global public good to improve their accessibility and affordability in developing countries. For that purpose, China has joined the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility (COVAX). We support APEC in strengthening policy exchanges and capacity building in the areas of public health and MSMEs. China has made a telemedicine initiative to give people in poor and remote areas access to timely and quality medical services. We hope these efforts will contribute to anti-epidemic cooperation and economic recovery.
中方高度重视亚太经合组织作用，将继续支持亚太经合组织发展，始终不渝扎根亚太、建设亚太、造福亚太。
China highly values the role of APEC. We will continue to support the organization’s development, and with our root struck deep in the Asia-Pacific, we will continue to serve its development and prosperity.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
今年，中国人民经过艰苦卓绝努力，取得抗疫斗争重大战略成果。中国同各国携手合作、共克时艰，为全球抗疫贡献了智慧和力量。中方毫无保留同各方分享防控和救治经验，向其他国家和国际组织提供力所能及帮助，以实际行动推动构建人类卫生健康共同体。我们统筹疫情防控和经济社会发展，加强宏观政策应对力度，推动中国经济稳步前行、逐步向好、不断升级。今年，中国经济前三季度同比增长0.7%，全年实现正增长已成定局，特别是现行标准下农村贫困人口将实现全面脱贫。
This year, the Chinese people have exerted strenuous efforts to score a major strategic achievement in controlling COVID-19. Working with other countries in these trying times, China has contributed its wisdom and resources to the global fight against the coronavirus. It has shared with various parties full experience on containment and treatment and done its best to assist other countries and international organizations. All these are among the concrete actions we have taken toward building a global community of health for all. At the same time, we have coordinated COVID-19 control with economic and social development at home, and scaled up macro policy response so that the Chinese economy could stabilize, pick up, and steadily upgrade. In the first three quarters of this year, China’s GDP grew by 0.7 percent, on course to register positive growth for the whole year. It is also worth noting that by the end of this year, we will have lifted out of poverty all rural residents living below the current poverty line.
不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。中国将建设更高水平开放型经济新体制，创造更具吸引力的投资和营商环境。
The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. China will build a new system of open economy of higher standards and create a more attractive investment and business environment.
中国愿同亚太各方一道，共创共享亚太和平繁荣美好未来，向构建人类命运共同体目标不断迈进。
To conclude, China is ready to work with all other parties in the Asia-Pacific to build and share a brighter future of peace and prosperity for our region and get ever closer to the goal of a community with a shard future for mankind.
谢谢大家。
I thank you all.
