114. 习近平在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十五次会议上的讲话
团结互助 共迎挑战 推动上海合作组织实现新跨越
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十五次会议上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
（2015年7月10日，乌法）
Strengthening Shanghai Cooperation Organization Through Unity, Mutual Support and Joint Response to Challenges
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 15th Meeting of the Council of the Heads of State of The Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States
Ufa, 10 July 2015
尊敬的各位同事：	
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到美丽的乌法出席上海合作组织峰会。感谢东道主俄罗斯为这次峰会顺利举行所做的精心准备和周到安排。一年来，俄方作为主席国为深化上海合作组织各领域合作做了大量卓有成效的工作，为上海合作组织下阶段发展打下坚实基础。中方对此高度评价。
It gives me great pleasure to come to the beautiful city of Ufa to attend the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit. Let me thank our host, the Russian Federation, for its meticulous preparations and hospitality. We also applaud Russia for its effective work in the past year to promote SCO cooperation in various fields, which has laid a solid foundation for strengthening the SCO.
去年杜尚别峰会以来，上海合作组织成员国密切配合，相互支持，妥善因应形势变化，加大了维护本地区安全稳定力度，提高了成员国利益融合和交流合作水平，本组织吸引力和凝聚力持续增强。同时，也要看到，受国际和地区形势动荡、“三股势力”沆瀣合流、地区国家经济下行压力加大等内外因素影响，本地区安全稳定和经济发展都遇到相当多的困难和挑战，上海合作组织发展面临的外部形势不容乐观。
Since the last summit in Dushanbe, SCO member states have worked together to respond to changing developments through closer coordination and mutual support. Efforts have been intensified to maintain security and stability in our region. Mutual interests and cooperation among member states have expanded. The influence and cohesiveness of this organization continue to grow. On the other hand, given the fluid international and regional landscape, the convergence of the three forces and mounting downward pressure on the economy of countries in the region, our region faces multiple difficulties and challenges in promoting security, stability and economic growth. And we should not be overly optimistic about the general external environment of the SCO.
我们要加快步伐，切实行动，以上海合作组织至2025年发展战略为指导，在新起点上推动组织实现新跨越，为地区各国共同维护稳定和促进发展提供坚实保障和强大助力。
We need to move faster and take more concrete actions. We have reached a new departure point. We should, guided by the SCO Development Strategy Towards 2025, make the SCO cross new thresholds and make it an anchor and driver for promoting stability and development of the countries in the region.
第一，坚持“上海精神”，打造本地区命运共同体。15年来，互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”已经成为上海合作组织赖以生存发展的根基，代表了当今国际关系发展方向。
First, we should follow the Shanghai spirit to build a community of common destiny. Featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respecting diverse civilizations and seeking common development, the Shanghai spirit has over the past 15 years underpinned the SCO's development and represents the trend in contemporary international relations.
今天，“上海精神”仍然具有时代意义。我们要继续以“上海精神”为指引，坚持上海合作组织一贯秉持的国际关系准则，维护国际公平正义，倡导多边主义和开放主义，相互尊重彼此利益，不干涉别国内政，以和平方式解决分歧争端，以共赢理念促进发展繁荣。要让“上海精神”在本地区更加深入人心、发扬光大，成为本组织成员国打造命运共同体、共建和谐家园的精神纽带。
Fifteen years on, the Shanghai spirit is still highly relevant. We should continue to observe it and other principles governing international relations championed by the SCO. We should uphold international equity and justice, promote multilateralism and openness, respect each other's interests, refrain from interfering in other country's internal affairs, settle disputes through peaceful means and seek common development and prosperity with a win-win approach. We should carry forward the Shanghai spirit in our region and make it an inspirational bond bringing member states together in our endeavor to build a community of common destiny and promote harmony in our region.
战争的惨痛教训不容忘记。今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利和联合国成立70周年。本组织成员国都经历了第二次世界大战血与火的考验，为战争胜利付出了巨大牺牲。各国元首将在峰会后发表关于世界反法西斯战争暨第二次世界大战胜利70周年的声明，发出呼唤和平的一致声音。我们要继续做捍卫第二次世界大战胜利成果的坚定力量，绝不允许任何人歪曲历史、践踏和平。
The painful lesson of war should never be forgotten. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the World Anti-Fascist War and the founding of the United Nations. All SCO member states endured the test of blood and fire of World War II and contributed to the final victory with enormous sacrifice. After this summit, we will issue a declaration commemorating the victory of the World Anti-Fascist War and World War II and make a joint call for peace. We will continue to be a staunch force for upholding the victorious outcomes of World War II and never allow anyone to distort history or undermine peace.
借此机会，我谨代表中方向在第二次世界大战中英勇战斗、为人类正义事业捐躯的烈士，表示深切的缅怀！向支援中国人民反抗日本军国主义侵略的国家和国际友人，表示衷心的感谢！
On behalf of China, I take this opportunity to pay deep tribute to all those who fought fearlessly and made the ultimate sacrifice for the noble cause of justice during World War II. I also extend my heartfelt appreciation to all the countries and foreign friends who supported the Chinese people in their struggle against Japanese militarist aggression.
第二，加强行动能力，筑牢地区安全屏障。维护地区安全稳定是本组织所有成员国共同关切。防止地区局势生乱、防范恐怖主义和宗教极端思想肆意蔓延、防止别有用心势力破坏地区和平稳定是本组织职责所在。
Second, we should strengthen capabilities to uphold security in our region. Upholding security and stability in our region is a common concern for all member states. The SCO has the responsibility to prevent instability, forestall the spread of terrorist and religious extremist ideologies and stop forces with hidden agenda from undermining peace and stability in our region.
我们要加强政策沟通和协调，研究应对举措，共同维护各成员国政权、制度、社会安全和稳定。
We should enhance policy consultation and coordination, study ways of responding to challenges and work together to uphold the government, system, security and stability of SCO member states.
我们要应对好阿富汗局势，加强同阿富汗安全合作，帮助阿富汗安全力量加强能力建设，在促进阿富汗实现民族和解和经济重建过程中发挥更大作用。
We should respond to new developments in Afghanistan, strengthen security cooperation with Afghanistan, help Afghan security forces build capacity, and play a bigger role in promoting national reconciliation and economic reconstruction in Afghanistan.
我们要强有力推进反恐、禁毒、防务合作，提高本组织安全行动能力，形成更严密健全的执法合作网络。加快在地区反恐怖机构基础上建立应对安全挑战和威胁中心，强化本组织禁毒职能，对本组织应对安全挑战具有迫切现实意义。中方欢迎成员国此次签署《边防合作协定》，完善本组织安全合作的法律基础，巩固成员国外部边界稳定，愿同各方加紧研究起草本组织《反极端主义公约》。
We should take strong measures to advance counter-terrorism, drug control and defense cooperation, increase SCO security operation capacity, and strengthen the network of law enforcement cooperation. We should, on the basis of the Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure, accelerate the building of a center for responding to security challenge and threat and enhance drug control functions of the SCO. This will be an urgently needed and effective step for the SCO to meet security challenges. China welcomes the signing of the Border Control Cooperation Agreement among member states, as this will improve the legal basis for SCO security cooperation and ensure border stability of member states. And China is ready to speed up study and drafting of the Anti-Extremism Convention of the SCO with other member states.
第三，深挖合作潜力，充实务实合作内容。寻求新的增长点、改善社会民生是本组织成员国的重大任务。上海合作组织应该推动各方在互利共赢基础上，创造更多合作机遇，推动区域经济合作取得早期收获。
Third, we should tap potential for cooperation and enrich practical cooperation. To seek new growth areas and improve people's livelihood is a major task for SCO member states. On the basis of promoting mutual benefit, the SCO should encourage its member states to create more cooperation opportunities and strive for early harvest in regional economic cooperation.
我们要在贸易和投资便利化自由化方面迈出更大步伐。应该扩大贸易规模，优化贸易结构，制定共同措施，协调经贸、海关、质检、运输等领域政策。
We should take even bigger steps to promote trade and investment facilitation and liberalization. It is important for us to expand trade volume, improve trade structure, adopt common measures, and harmonize business, customs, quality inspection and transport policies.
交通设施互联互通是区域合作的优先领域和重要基础。各方应积极参与上海合作组织公路协调发展规划的制订工作，加快实施成员国间道路运输便利化协定。中方愿同各方加强合作，优先实施已经达成共识的互联互通项目，为项目可行性研究和规划提供资金支持，参与设计和建设的投融资合作。在未来几年，推动建成4000公里铁路、超过10000公里公路，基本形成区域内互联互通格局。
Transport infrastructure connectivity is a priority area and important basis for enhancing regional cooperation. The SCO member states should take an active part in the formulation of the SCO Plan for the Coordinated Development of Roads, and accelerate the implementation of the Road Transport Facilitation Agreement. China is ready to step up cooperation with other member states, carry out agreed connectivity projects on a priority basis, provide funding support for the feasibility study and planning of projects, and participate in investment and financing cooperation of the design and construction of projects. In the next few years, we will build 4,000 kilometers of railways and over 10,000 kilometers of roads, thus basically forming a regional connectivity architecture.
开展成员国间投资、产能、装备、基础设施建设合作，对培育新的经济增长点、扩大就业具有重要现实意义。中国同哈萨克斯坦等国已经就有关合作达成共识。成员国可以利用互补优势，在平等互利基础上开展联合生产，并将产品推向国际市场。中方愿根据市场原则，推动在每个成员国建立合作园区，不断深化产能合作。
To conduct cooperation in investment, production capacity, equipment and infrastructure development between member states is important to fostering new growth areas and creating more jobs. China has reached cooperation agreement with Kazakhstan and other countries in this area. The member states may leverage complementary strengths, carry out joint production on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, and introduce such products to the international market. China will work for the establishment of cooperation zones in each member state and deepen production capacity cooperation on the basis of market operation.
成立上海合作组织开发银行是促进本组织多边合作的战略举措，对组织未来发展意义深远。我们应该坚持这一方向，争取早日建成本组织自有融资平台，为多边普惠项目和各国经济发展服务。现阶段，中方愿通过丝路基金、中国－欧亚经济合作基金等金融平台，解决上海合作组织成员国投资需求，结合《2017至2021年上海合作组织进一步推动项目合作的措施清单》，重点在重大基础设施项目、资源开发、产业和金融合作等领域开展投资合作。
To establish the SCO development bank is a strategic measure to promote multilateral cooperation within the organization, and it has far-reaching significance for its future development. We should keep working on it and set up an SCO financing platform at an early date, so as to support multilateral inclusive financing projects and economic development of various countries. China is ready to use financing platforms such as the Silk Road Fund and the China-Eurasia Economic Cooperation Fund to meet the investment needs of SCO member states. We should give priority to investment cooperation in major infrastructure projects, resource development, and industrial and financial cooperation in accordance with the List of Measures by the SCO to Further Promote Project Cooperation 2017-2021.
中方正在落实3年内为上海合作组织成员国培训2000名人才的计划。同时，中方还将在产业规划、项目可行性研究、咨询等领域提供技术援助，提高各国能力建设水平。	
China is implementing a plan to train 2,000 personnel for SCO member states in three years. It will also provide technical assistance in industrial planning, project feasibility study, consulting and other areas to help member states bolster capacity-building.
我们应该加强各国能源政策沟通，制定跨国油气管道安保合作具体措施。要继续扩大农产品贸易，开展农林牧渔合作，共同保障粮食安全。中方愿继续利用中方资金，为成员国培训农业技术人员，提高各国农业技术和粮食生产水平。中方建议制定“上海合作组织科技伙伴计划”，加快推动环保信息共享平台建设，愿同各国一道，发挥好上海合作组织实业家委员会、银行联合体等机制作用。	
We should enhance communication on energy policy, and introduce specific measures for enhancing cooperation on security of transnational oil and gas pipelines. We need to expand trade in agricultural produce and foster cooperation in agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishery to ensure food security. China will continue to train agricultural technicians for member states with its own fund to improve agro-technology and grain production of member states. China proposes the formulation of an SCO scientific and technological partnership program and the establishment of a platform for sharing information on environmental protection. We will work with other member states to fully leverage the role of SCO Entrepreneurs Committee and the Inter-Bank Consortium.
在各方支持和响应下，中方提出的共建丝绸之路经济带倡议得以顺利实施。我们希望丝绸之路经济带建设同上海合作组织各国发展规划相辅相成，将同有关国家一道，实施好丝绸之路经济带同欧亚经济联盟对接，促进欧亚地区平衡发展。	
With the positive response and support of all parties, the initiative of jointly building the Silk Road Economic Belt proposed by China is well underway. We hope that this initiative and the development plans of member states will complement each other; and we will work with relevant countries to form synergy between this initiative and the Eurasian Economic Union so as to advance the balanced development of Eurasia.
第四，推动民心相通，巩固世代睦邻友好。古老的丝绸之路见证了各国人民结下的深厚传统友谊。我们应该继续弘扬丝路精神，夯实本地区各国友好交往的民意基础，让各国人民互信互敬，共建和谐、安宁、繁荣的家园。	
Fourth, we should increase understanding between our peoples and foster enduring friendship. The ancient silk road bears testimony to the profound friendship of our peoples. We should carry forward the silk road spirit and enhance public support for our friendship. With mutual trust and respect between our peoples, we will be able to build a harmonious, peaceful and prosperous homeland.
中方支持拓宽本组织各国民间和社会交流渠道，深化文化、教育、卫生、旅游、体育、媒体等各领域交流合作。为加强青年交往，中方将在邀请上海合作组织国家青年领导人访华研修计划的基础上，自2016年起连续5年在华举办“上海合作组织青年交流营”，每年邀请本组织国家200名青年代表参加活动。应中方邀请，去年塔吉克斯坦198名中小学生赴华参加了夏令营活动。今年，包括来自峰会举办地乌法市的俄罗斯200名中小学生将赴华。中方将在2018年前完成为成员国2000名中小学生举办夏令营活动。	
China supports expanding the scope of people-to-people exchange and deepening communication and cooperation in areas such as culture, education, health, tourism, sports and media. To boost youth exchange, China will, in addition to providing training for young leaders from member states, host an SCO youth exchange camp in China for five consecutive years starting from 2016 with 200 young people participating annually. Last year, 198 middle and primary school students from Tajikistan were invited to join a summer camp program in China. This year, 200 middle and primary school students from our host city Ufa will visit China. By 2018, China will have hosted summer camps for 2,000 middle and primary school students from SCO member states.
2014年，中国海外旅游等出境人数突破l亿人次。俄罗斯、乌兹别克斯坦已经是中国公民出境旅游目的地国。我们愿同上海合作组织其他国家共同分享中国出境旅游发展给各国经济带来的巨大机遇，也希望各国简化中国公民赴有关国家签证手续。	
In 2014, over 100 million overseas visits were made by people from China. Russia and Uzbekistan are both now tourist destinations for Chinese citizens. We are ready to share with other member states the immense economic opportunities created by Chinese overseas tourists, and hope that they will streamline visa procedures for Chinese citizens.
中国支持各国加强司法交流合作，愿依托中国－上海合作组织国际司法交流合作培训基地，协助成员国培训司法人才。	
China supports greater judicial exchange and cooperation among SCO members and will assist other member states in training judicial personnel through the China-SCO International Judicial Exchange and Training Center.
中方支持成员国在紧急救灾、传染病防治、便利人员往来等领域继续加强合作，愿同各国研究探讨中医药合作、简化人员签证和劳务许可手续等举措。	
China supports enhanced cooperation among SCO members in areas such as disaster relief, epidemic prevention and treatment and facilitation of people-to-people exchange. We will discuss with other member states ways of boosting cooperation in traditional Chinese medicine and measures to streamline procedures for visa application and work permit.
第五，保持开放互鉴，推动组织发展。本次峰会后，本组织将启动接收印度、巴基斯坦为新成员的程序。我们也欢迎白俄罗斯成为本组织观察员国，阿塞拜疆、亚美尼亚、柬埔寨、尼泊尔成为对话伙伴国。中方相信，新生力量的加入将给上海合作组织各领域合作注入新动力。	
Fifth, we should boost the growth of the SCO with an open mind and through mutual learning. After this summit, the SCO will launch the process of admitting India and Pakistan as new members. We also welcome Belarus as an observer state and Azerbaijan, Armenia, Cambodia and Nepal as dialogue partners to the SCO. China believes that their participation will inject fresh vitality into SCO cooperation across the board.
我们要支持本组织继续扩大对外交往，密切同联合国、独联体、欧亚经济联盟、集安条约组织、东盟、亚信等国际和地区多边机制的联系和合作，交流互鉴，取长补短。	
We need to support the SCO in expanding its contacts with other organizations and forging closer ties and cooperation with the UN, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Eurasian Economic Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia and other international and regional multilateral mechanisms to benefit more from mutual learning.
我们要深入研究如何加强同观察员国、对话伙伴合作问题，继续健全相应对话和合作机制，使上海合作组织发展成果更多惠及观察员国和对话伙伴，实现优势互补，成果共享。
We need to study ways to strengthen cooperation with observer states and dialogue partners and improve relevant dialogue and cooperation mechanisms, so that observer states and dialogue partners will benefit more from the SCO through drawing on each other's strengths and sharing the fruits of development.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
我相信，只要我们继续秉持“上海精神”，团结互助，就一定能够推动上海合作组织在新的历史条件下，百尺竿头、更进一步，实现新的跨越和发展！	
It is my conviction that by upholding the Shanghai spirit and acting with unity and mutual support, we will surely enable the SCO to grow from strength to strength and make new strides in a new historical stage.
谢谢各位。	
Thank you.
