10. 习近平在联合国生物多样性峰会上的讲话
在联合国生物多样性峰会上的讲话
（2020年9月30日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the United Nations Summit on Biodiversity
Beijing, 30 September 2020
主席先生，
各位同事：
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
在联合国成立75周年之际，在各国致力于抗击新冠肺炎疫情、推动经济高质量复苏这一特殊时刻，联合国举办生物多样性峰会，大家共同探讨保护生物多样性、促进可持续发展的重大课题，具有现实而深远的意义。
At the special moment as the United Nations marks the 75th anniversary of its founding and countries around the world strive to emerge from COVID-19 and promote high-quality economic recovery, the UN has convened this Summit on Biodiversity. It gives us an opportunity to discuss major issues of biodiversity protection and sustainable development and therefore has both practical and far-reaching significance.
中国将于明年在昆明举办《生物多样性公约》第十五次缔约方大会，同各方共商全球生物多样性治理新战略。
The 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (COP15) will be hosted by China next year in the city of Kunming. COP15 offers an opportunity for the parties to adopt new strategies for global biodiversity governance.
当前，全球物种灭绝速度不断加快，生物多样性丧失和生态系统退化对人类生存和发展构成重大风险。新冠肺炎疫情告诉我们，人与自然是命运共同体。我们要同心协力，抓紧行动，在发展中保护，在保护中发展，共建万物和谐的美丽家园。我建议：
At present, there exists an acceleration of the global extinction of species. The loss of biodiversity and the degradation of the ecosystem pose a major risk to human survival and development. COVID-19 reminds us of the interdependence between man and Nature. It falls to all of us to act together and urgently to advance protection and development in parallel, so that we can turn Earth into a beautiful homeland for all creatures to live in harmony. To that end, I would like to make the following proposals:
第一，坚持生态文明，增强建设美丽世界动力。生物多样性关系人类福祉，是人类赖以生存和发展的重要基础。工业文明创造了巨大物质财富，但也带来了生物多样性丧失和环境破坏的生态危机。生态兴则文明兴。我们要站在对人类文明负责的高度，尊重自然、顺应自然、保护自然，探索人与自然和谐共生之路，促进经济发展与生态保护协调统一，共建繁荣、清洁、美丽的世界。
First, we need to adhere to ecological civilization and increase the drive for building a beautiful world. Biodiversity affects the well-being of humanity and provides the very basis for the human race to survive and thrive. The industrial civilization, while creating vast material wealth, has caused ecological crises as manifested in biodiversity loss and environmental damage. A sound ecosystem is essential for the prosperity of civilization. We need to take up our lofty responsibility for the entire human civilization, and we need to respect Nature, follow its laws and protect it. We need to find a way for man and Nature to live in harmony, balance and coordinate economic development and ecological protection, and work together to build a prosperous, clean and beautiful world.
第二，坚持多边主义，凝聚全球环境治理合力。联合国成立以来，国际社会积极推进全球环境治理。《生物多样性公约》、《联合国气候变化框架公约》及其《巴黎协定》等国际条约是相关环境治理的法律基础，也是多边合作的重要成果，得到各方广泛支持和参与。面对全球环境风险挑战，各国是同舟共济的命运共同体，单边主义不得人心，携手合作方为正道。我们要坚定捍卫以联合国为核心的国际体系，维护国际规则尊严和权威，提升全球环境治理水平。
Second, we need to uphold multilateralism and build synergy for global governance on the environment. Since the founding of the UN, the international community has made active efforts toward global environmental governance. International instruments such as the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement form the legal foundation for environmental governance in their respective fields. They represent important accomplishments of multilateral cooperation and enjoy broad support and participation from the international community. Faced with the risks and challenges to the environment worldwide, countries share a common stake as passengers in the same boat and form a community with a shared future. Unilateralism finds no support; cooperation is the right way forward. We must firmly safeguard the UN-centered international system and uphold the sanctity and authority of international rules so as to enhance global governance on the environment.
第三，保持绿色发展，培育疫后经济高质量复苏活力。新冠肺炎疫情对全球经济社会发展造成全面冲击，我们要着眼长远，保持定力，坚持绿色、包容、可持续发展。联合国发布的《2030年可持续发展议程》为各国发展指明了方向，生物多样性既是可持续发展基础，也是目标和手段。我们要以自然之道，养万物之生，从保护自然中寻找发展机遇，实现生态环境保护和经济高质量发展双赢。
Third, we need to continue with green development and increase the potential for high-quality economic recovery after COVID-19. Globally, the coronavirus has wreaked havoc on every aspect of economic and social development. We need to have our eyes on the long run, have determination and stay the course for green, inclusive and sustainable development. The UN's 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development points the way forward, and recognizes biodiversity as an important basis, a goal and the means for achieving sustainable development. Recognizing that "our solutions are in Nature", we could strive to find development opportunities while preserving Nature, and achieve win-win in both ecological conservation and high-quality development.
第四，增强责任心，提升应对环境挑战行动力。发达国家和发展中国家处于不同发展阶段，在环境问题上的历史责任和现实能力存在差异。我们要坚持共同但有区别的责任原则，坚持公平公正惠益分享，照顾发展中国家资金、技术、能力建设方面的关切。我们要切实践行承诺，抓好目标落实，有效扭转生物多样性丧失，共同守护地球家园。
Fourth, we need to heighten our sense of responsibility and strengthen the power of action to tackle challenges to the environment. Being at varying stages of development, developed and developing countries have different historical responsibilities and practical capabilities for addressing environmental issues. We need to uphold the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, ensure fair and equitable sharing of benefits, and accommodate developing countries' concerns over funding, technology and capacity building. We need to earnestly fulfill our commitments, focus on our targets, and effectively reverse biodiversity loss so as to protect the planet we call home.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
“生态文明：共建地球生命共同体”既是明年昆明大会的主题，也是人类对未来的美好寄语。作为昆明大会主席国，中方愿同各方分享生物多样性治理和生态文明建设经验。
"Ecological Civilization: Building a Shared Future for All Life on Earth", which is the theme of next year's Biodiversity Conference in Kunming, embodies humanity's hope for a better future. As the host country of COP15, China is happy to share with all parties its experience of advancing biodiversity governance and ecological progress.
——中国用生态文明理念指导发展。从道法自然、天人合一的中国传统智慧，到创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念，中国把生态文明建设放在突出地位，融入中国经济社会发展各方面和全过程，努力建设人与自然和谐共生的现代化。
— China has pursued development under the vision of building an ecological civilization. From the traditional Chinese wisdom that the laws of Nature govern all things and that man must seek harmony with Nature, to the new development philosophy emphasizing innovative, coordinated, green and open development for all, China has always prioritized ecological progress and embedded it in every dimension and phase of its economic and social development. The goal is to seek a kind of modernization that promotes harmonious coexistence of man and Nature.
——中国采取有力政策行动。中国坚持山水林田湖草生命共同体，协同推进生物多样性治理。加快国家生物多样性保护立法步伐，划定生态保护红线，建立国家公园体系，实施生物多样性保护重大工程，提高社会参与和公众意识。过去10年，森林资源增长面积超过7000万公顷，居全球首位。长时间、大规模治理沙化、荒漠化，有效保护修复湿地，生物遗传资源收集保藏量位居世界前列。90%的陆地生态系统类型和85%的重点野生动物种群得到有效保护。
— China has rolled out strong policies and actions. China adopts a holistic approach to conserving the mountains, rivers, forests, farmlands, lakes and grasslands, and makes coordinated efforts to advance biodiversity governance. We have stepped up national legislation for preserving biodiversity, and are drawing red lines for protecting the ecosystems. We have effected a national parks system, carried out major biodiversity conservation projects, and increased social participation and public awareness. For the last 10 years, China has topped the world in forest resource increase, with more than 70 million hectares of land afforested. We have made long-term, large-scale efforts to combat sandification and desertification, and we have effectively protected and restored the wetlands. We now have one of the world's largest banks of genetic resources reserve. Ninety percent of terrestrial ecosystem types and 85 percent of key wild animal populations are under effective protection.
——中国积极参与全球环境治理。中国切实履行气候变化、生物多样性等环境相关条约义务，已提前完成2020年应对气候变化和设立自然保护区相关目标。作为世界上最大发展中国家，我们也愿承担与中国发展水平相称的国际责任，为全球环境治理贡献力量。中国将秉持人类命运共同体理念，继续作出艰苦卓绝努力，提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更加有力的政策和措施，二氧化碳排放力争于2030年前达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和，为实现应对气候变化《巴黎协定》确定的目标作出更大努力和贡献。
— China has taken an active part in global environmental governance. China takes seriously its obligations under environment-related treaties, including on climate change and biodiversity. We have hit, ahead of schedule, the targets set for 2020 for tackling climate change and establishing protected areas. As the largest developing country, China is prepared to take on international responsibilities commensurate with its level of development, and contribute its part to global environmental governance. Guided by the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, China will continue to make extraordinary efforts to scale up its nationally determined contributions. China will adopt even more forceful policies and measures and strive to peak carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060, thus making greater efforts and contributions toward meeting the objectives of the Paris Agreement.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
“山积而高，泽积而长。”加强生物多样性保护、推进全球环境治理需要各方持续坚韧努力。我欢迎大家明年聚首美丽的春城昆明，共商全球生物多样性保护大计，期待各方达成全面平衡、有力度、可执行的行动框架。让我们从这次峰会携手出发，同心协力，共建万物和谐的美丽世界！
As the saying goes, "Little by little, grains of soil pile up to make a mountain and drops of water converge to form a river." To enhance biodiversity conservation and global environmental governance require sustained efforts by all parties. I want to welcome you to Kunming, the beautiful "Spring City", next year, to discuss and draw up plans together for protecting global biodiversity, and I look forward to the adoption of a comprehensive, balanced, ambitious and implementable framework of action. Now, let us proceed from this Summit and work in concert to build a beautiful world of harmony among all beings on the planet.
