11. 习近平在第75届联大一般性辩论上的讲话
（2020年9月22日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the General Debate of the 75th Session of
The United Nations General Assembly
Beijing, 22 September 2020
主席先生，
各位同事：
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利75周年，也是联合国成立75周年。昨天，联合国隆重举行纪念峰会，铭记世界反法西斯战争历史经验和教训，重申对联合国宪章宗旨和原则的坚定承诺，具有重要意义。
This year marks the 75th anniversary of the victory in the World Anti-Fascist War and the founding of the United Nations (UN). Yesterday, the high-level meeting to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the UN was held. The meeting was a significant one, as it reaffirmed our abiding commitment to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter on the basis of reviewing the historical experience and lessons of the World Anti-Fascist War.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
人类正在同新冠肺炎疫情进行斗争。病毒肆虐全球，疫情不断反复。我们目睹了各国政府的努力、医务人员的付出、科学工作者的探索、普通民众的坚守。各国人民守望相助，展现出人类在重大灾难面前的勇气、决心、关爱，照亮了至暗时刻。疫情终将被人类战胜，胜利必将属于世界人民！
We humans are battling COVID-19, a virus that has ravaged the world and has kept resurging. In this fight, we have witnessed the efforts of governments, dedication of medical workers, exploration of scientists, and perseverance of the public. People of different countries have come together. With courage, resolve and compassion which lit the dark hour, we have confronted the disaster head on. The virus will be defeated. Humanity will win this battle!
——面对疫情，我们要践行人民至上、生命至上理念。要调集一切资源，科学防治，精准施策，不遗漏一个感染者，不放弃一位患者，坚决遏制疫情蔓延。
- Facing the virus, we should put people and life first. We should mobilize all resources to make a science-based and targeted response. No case should be missed and no patient should be left untreated. The spread of the virus must be contained.
——面对疫情，我们要加强团结、同舟共济。要秉持科学精神，充分发挥世界卫生组织关键领导作用，推进国际联防联控，坚决打赢全球疫情阻击战，反对政治化、污名化。
- Facing the virus, we should enhance solidarity and get this through together. We should follow the guidance of science, give full play to the leading role of the World Health Organization, and launch a joint international response to beat this pandemic. Any attempt of politicizing the issue or stigmatization must be rejected.
——面对疫情，我们要制定全面和常态化防控措施。要有序推进复商复市复工复学，创造就业，拉动经济，恢复经济社会秩序和活力，主要经济体要加强宏观政策协调，不仅要重启本国经济，而且要为世界经济复苏作出贡献。
- Facing the virus, we should adopt comprehensive and long-term control measures. We should reopen businesses and schools in an orderly way, so as to create jobs, boost the economy, and restore economic and social order and vitality. The major economies need to step up macro policy coordination. We should not only restart our own economies, but also contribute to global recovery.
——面对疫情，我们要关心和照顾发展中国家特别是非洲国家。国际社会要在减缓债务、援助等方面采取及时和强有力举措，确保落实好《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》，帮助他们克服困难。
- Facing the virus, we should show concern for and accommodate the need of developing countries, especially African countries. The international community needs to take timely and robust measures in such fields as debt relief and international assistance, ensure the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and help these countries overcome their difficulties.
75年前，中国为赢得世界反法西斯战争胜利作出了历史性贡献，支持建立了联合国。今天，秉持同样的担当精神，中国积极投身国际抗疫合作，为维护全球公共卫生安全贡献中国力量。我们将继续同各国分享抗疫经验和诊疗技术，向有需要的国家提供支持和帮助，确保全球抗疫物资供应链稳定，并积极参与病毒溯源和传播途径全球科学研究。中国已有多支疫苗进入Ⅲ期临床实验，研发完成并投入使用后将作为全球公共产品，优先向发展中国家提供。中国将落实好两年提供20亿美元国际援助的承诺，深化农业、减贫、教育、妇女儿童、气候变化等领域国际合作，助力各国经济社会恢复发展。
Seventy-five years ago, China made historic contributions to winning the World Anti-Fascist War and supported the founding of the United Nations. Today, with the same sense of responsibility, China is actively involved in the international fight against COVID-19, contributing its share to upholding global public health security. Going forward, we will continue to share our epidemic control practices as well as diagnostics and therapeutics with other countries, provide support and assistance to countries in need, ensure stable global anti-epidemic supply chains, and actively participate in the global research on tracing the source and transmission routes of the virus. At the moment, several COVID-19 vaccines developed by China are in Phase III clinical trials. When their development is completed and they are available for use, these vaccines will be made a global public good, and they will be provided to other developing countries on a priority basis. China will honor its commitment of providing US$2 billion of international assistance over two years, further international cooperation in such fields as agriculture, poverty reduction, education, women and children, and climate change, and support other countries in restoring economic and social development.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
人类社会发展史，就是一部不断战胜各种挑战和困难的历史。新冠肺炎疫情全球大流行和世界百年未有之大变局相互影响，但和平与发展的时代主题没有变，各国人民和平发展合作共赢的期待更加强烈。新冠肺炎疫情不会是人类面临的最后一次危机，我们必须做好携手迎接更多全球性挑战的准备。
The history of development of human society is a history of our struggles against all challenges and difficulties and our victories over them. At present, the world is battling the COVID-19 pandemic as it goes through profound changes never seen in a century. Yet, peace and development remain the underlying trend of the times, and people everywhere crave even more strongly for peace, development and win-win cooperation. COVID-19 will not be the last crisis to confront humanity, so we must join hands and be prepared to meet even more global challenges.
第一，这场疫情启示我们，我们生活在一个互联互通、休戚与共的地球村里。各国紧密相连，人类命运与共。任何国家都不能从别国的困难中谋取利益，从他国的动荡中收获稳定。如果以邻为壑、隔岸观火，别国的威胁迟早会变成自己的挑战。我们要树立你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体意识，跳出小圈子和零和博弈思维，树立大家庭和合作共赢理念，摒弃意识形态争论，跨越文明冲突陷阱，相互尊重各国自主选择的发展道路和模式，让世界多样性成为人类社会进步的不竭动力、人类文明多姿多彩的天然形态。
First, COVID-19 reminds us that we are living in an interconnected global village with a common stake. All countries are closely connected and we share a common future. No country can gain from others' difficulties or maintain stability by taking advantage of others' troubles. To pursue a beggar-thy-neighbor policy or just watch from a safe distance when others are in danger will eventually land one in the same trouble faced by others. This is why we should embrace the vision of a community with a shared future in which everyone is bound together. We should reject attempts to build blocs to keep others out and oppose a zero-sum approach. We should see each other as members of the same big family, pursue win-win cooperation, and rise above ideological disputes and do not fall into the trap of "clash of civilizations". More importantly, we should respect a country's independent choice of development path and model. The world is diverse in nature, and we should turn this diversity into a constant source of inspiration driving human advancement. This will ensure that human civilizations remain colorful and diversified.
第二，这场疫情启示我们，经济全球化是客观现实和历史潮流。面对经济全球化大势，像鸵鸟一样把头埋在沙里假装视而不见，或像堂吉诃德一样挥舞长矛加以抵制，都违背了历史规律。世界退不回彼此封闭孤立的状态，更不可能被人为割裂。我们不能回避经济全球化带来的挑战，必须直面贫富差距、发展鸿沟等重大问题。我们要处理好政府和市场、公平和效率、增长和分配、技术和就业的关系，使发展既平衡又充分，发展成果公平惠及不同国家不同阶层不同人群。我们要秉持开放包容理念，坚定不移构建开放型世界经济，维护以世界贸易组织为基石的多边贸易体制，旗帜鲜明反对单边主义、保护主义，维护全球产业链供应链稳定畅通。
Second, COVID-19 reminds us that economic globalization is an indisputable reality and a historical trend. Burying one's head in the sand like an ostrich in the face of economic globalization or trying to fight it with Don Quixote's lance goes against the trend of history. Let this be clear: The world will never return to isolation, and no one can sever the ties between countries. We should not dodge the challenges of economic globalization. Instead, we must face up to major issues such as the wealth gap and the development divide. We should strike a proper balance between the government and the market, fairness and efficiency, growth and income distribution, and technology and employment so as to ensure full and balanced development that delivers benefit to people from all countries, sectors and backgrounds in an equitable way. We should pursue open and inclusive development, remain committed to building an open world economy, and uphold the multilateral trading regime with the World Trade Organization as the cornerstone. We should say no to unilateralism and protectionism, and work to ensure the stable and smooth functioning of global industrial and supply chains.
第三，这场疫情启示我们，人类需要一场自我革命，加快形成绿色发展方式和生活方式，建设生态文明和美丽地球。人类不能再忽视大自然一次又一次的警告，沿着只讲索取不讲投入、只讲发展不讲保护、只讲利用不讲修复的老路走下去。应对气候变化《巴黎协定》代表了全球绿色低碳转型的大方向，是保护地球家园需要采取的最低限度行动，各国必须迈出决定性步伐。中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更加有力的政策和措施，二氧化碳排放力争于2030年前达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和。各国要树立创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念，抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革的历史性机遇，推动疫情后世界经济“绿色复苏”，汇聚起可持续发展的强大合力。
Third, COVID-19 reminds us that humankind should launch a green revolution and move faster to create a green way of development and life, preserve the environment and make Mother Earth a better place for all. Humankind can no longer afford to ignore the repeated warnings of Nature and go down the beaten path of extracting resources without investing in conservation, pursuing development at the expense of protection, and exploiting resources without restoration. The Paris Agreement on climate change charts the course for the world to transition to green and low-carbon development. It outlines the minimum steps to be taken to protect the Earth, our shared homeland, and all countries must take decisive steps to honor this Agreement. China will scale up its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions by adopting more vigorous policies and measures. We aim to have CO2 emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. We call on all countries to pursue innovative, coordinated, green and open development for all, seize the historic opportunities presented by the new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation, achieve a green recovery of the world economy in the post-COVID era and thus create a powerful force driving sustainable development.
第四，这场疫情启示我们，全球治理体系亟待改革和完善。疫情不仅是对各国执政能力的大考，也是对全球治理体系的检验。我们要坚持走多边主义道路，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系。全球治理应该秉持共商共建共享原则，推动各国权利平等、机会平等、规则平等，使全球治理体系符合变化了的世界政治经济，满足应对全球性挑战的现实需要，顺应和平发展合作共赢的历史趋势。国家之间有分歧是正常的，应该通过对话协商妥善化解。国家之间可以有竞争，但必须是积极和良性的，要守住道德底线和国际规范。大国更应该有大的样子，要提供更多全球公共产品，承担大国责任，展现大国担当。
Fourth, COVID-19 reminds us that the global governance system calls for reform and improvement. COVID-19 is a major test of the governance capacity of countries; it is also a test of the global governance system. We should stay true to multilateralism and safeguard the international system with the UN at its core. Global governance should be based on the principle of extensive consultation, joint cooperation and shared benefits so as to ensure that all countries enjoy equal rights and opportunities and follow the same rules. The global governance system should adapt itself to evolving global political and economic dynamics, meet global challenges and embrace the underlying trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation. It is natural for countries to have differences. What's important is to address them through dialogue and consultation. Countries may engage in competition, but such competition should be positive and healthy in nature. When in competition, countries should not breach the moral standard and should comply with international norms. In particular, major countries should act like major countries. They should provide more global public goods, take up their due responsibilities and live up to people's expectations.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
今年以来，14亿中国人民不畏艰难、上下同心，全力克服疫情影响，加快恢复生产生活秩序。我们有信心如期全面建成小康社会，如期实现现行标准下农村贫困人口全部脱贫，提前10年实现《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》减贫目标。
Since the start of this year, we, the 1.4 billion Chinese, undaunted by the strike of COVID-19, and with the government and the people united as one, have made all-out efforts to control the virus and speedily restore life and economy to normalcy. We have every confidence to achieve our goals within the set time frame, that is, to finish the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, lift out of poverty all rural residents living below the current poverty line, and meet ten years ahead of schedule the poverty eradication target set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
中国是世界上最大的发展中国家，走的是和平发展、开放发展、合作发展、共同发展的道路。我们永远不称霸，不扩张，不谋求势力范围，无意跟任何国家打冷战热战，坚持以对话弥合分歧，以谈判化解争端。我们不追求一枝独秀，不搞你输我赢，也不会关起门来封闭运行，将逐步形成以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局，为中国经济发展开辟空间，为世界经济复苏和增长增添动力。
China is the largest developing country in the world, a country that is committed to peaceful, open, cooperative and common development. We will never seek hegemony, expansion, or sphere of influence. We have no intention to fight either a Cold War or a hot war with any country. We will continue to narrow differences and resolve disputes with others through dialogue and negotiation. We do not seek to develop only ourselves or engage in a zero-sum game. We will not pursue development behind closed doors. Rather, we aim to foster, over time, a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. This will create more space for China's economic development and add impetus to global economic recovery and growth.
中国将继续做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。为支持联合国在国际事务中发挥核心作用，我宣布：
China will continue to work as a builder of global peace, a contributor to global development and a defender of international order. To support the UN in playing its central role in international affairs, I hereby announce the following steps to be taken by China:
——中国将向联合国新冠肺炎疫情全球人道主义应对计划再提供5000万美元支持；
- China will provide another US$50 million to the UN COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan.
——中国将设立规模5000万美元的第三期中国－联合国粮农组织南南合作信托基金；
- China will provide US$50 million to the China-FAO South-South Cooperation Trust Fund (Phase III).
——中国－联合国和平与发展基金将在2025年到期后延期5年；
- China will extend the Peace and Development Trust Fund between the UN and China by five years after it expires in 2025.
——中国将设立联合国全球地理信息知识与创新中心和可持续发展大数据国际研究中心，为落实《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》提供新助力。
- China will set up a UN Global Geospatial Knowledge and Innovation Center and an International Research Center of Big Data for Sustainable Development Goals to facilitate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
主席先生、各位同事！
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
历史接力棒已经传到我们这一代人手中，我们必须作出无愧于人民、无愧于历史的抉择。让我们团结起来，坚守和平、发展、公平、正义、民主、自由的全人类共同价值，推动构建新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体，共同创造世界更加美好的未来！
The baton of history has been passed to our generation, and we must make the right choice, a choice worthy of the people's trust and of our times. Let us join hands to uphold the values of peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom shared by all of us and build a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind. Together, we can make the world a better place for everyone.
