125. 习近平在和平共处五项原则发表60周年纪念大会上的讲话
弘扬和平共处五项原则 建设合作共赢美好世界
Carry forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence to build a better world through win-win cooperation
——在和平共处五项原则发表60周年纪念大会上的讲话
（2014年6月28日）
中华人民共和国主席
习近平	
Address by H.E. Mr. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Meeting Marking the 60th Anniversary Of the Initiation of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
28 June 2014
尊敬的吴登盛总统，尊敬的安萨里副总统，尊敬的各位使节、各位嘉宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency President U Thein Sein, Your Excellency Vice President Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Diplomatic Envoys, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，我们在这里隆重集会，纪念和平共处五项原则发表60周年。这是中国、印度、缅甸和国际社会共同的盛会，对弘扬和平共处五项原则、增进各国人民友好合作、促进世界和平与发展，具有重要意义。	
Today, we are meeting here to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the initiation of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. This is an important occasion not only for China, India and Myanmar, but also for the international community. It is of great significance for carrying forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, enhancing friendship and cooperation among peoples of various countries, and promoting world peace and development.
在这里，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾和朋友的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！	
On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I extend a very warm welcome to all of you, distinguished guests and friends.
刚才，吴登盛总统、安萨里副总统发表了热情洋溢的重要讲话，我对他们的讲话表示高度评价。	
President U Thein Sein and Vice President Hamid Ansari have just delivered warm and important remarks, which I very much appreciate.
60年前，在第二次世界大战结束后兴起的非殖民化运动中，亚非拉民族独立解放事业蓬勃发展，新生的国家渴望建立平等的国际关系。中国、印度、缅甸顺应这一历史潮流，共同倡导了互相尊重主权和领土完整、互不侵犯、互不干涉内政、平等互利、和平共处五项原则。	
Six decades ago, in the course of decolonization that started at the end of the Second World War, the struggle for independence and liberation in Asia, Africa and Latin America surged. The newly independent countries longed for equality in international relations. Echoing this historical trend, China, India and Myanmar jointly initiated the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, namely, mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
1954年6月28日和29日，中印、中缅分别发表联合声明，确认这五项原则将在相互关系以及各自国家同亚洲及世界其他国家的关系中予以适用。这是国际关系史上的重大创举，为推动建立公正合理的新型国际关系作出了历史性贡献。	
On 28 and 29 June 1954, China issued two joint statements respectively with India and Myanmar, confirming their commitment to these Five Principles in conducting their mutual relations and their respective relations with other countries in Asia and the world. This was a major initiative in the history of international relations and a historic contribution to the building of a new type of just and equitable international relations.
抚今追昔，我们对共同倡导和平共处五项原则的三国老一辈领导人表示深切的缅怀，对长期以来坚持弘扬和平共处五项原则的各国有识之士，致以崇高的敬意！	
At this moment of reflection, we greatly cherish the memory of the past leaders of our three countries who initiated the Five Principles and pay high tribute to people with vision in all countries who have carried forward the Five Principles over the years.
今天，我们共同纪念和平共处五项原则发表60周年，就是要探讨新形势下如何更好弘扬这五项原则，推动建立新型国际关系，共同建设合作共赢的美好世界。	
The commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence today gives us an opportunity to explore ways to better promote these Five Principles in the new era so as to build a new type of international relations and a better world of win-win cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
和平共处五项原则之所以在亚洲诞生，是因为它传承了亚洲人民崇尚和平的思想传统。中华民族历来崇尚“和为贵”、“和而不同”、“协和万邦”、“兼爱非攻”等理念。印度、缅甸等亚洲国家人民也历来崇尚仁爱、慈善、和平等价值观。印度伟大诗人泰戈尔用诗歌的语言写道：“你以为用战争可以获取友谊？春天就会从眼前姗姗而去。”缅甸人民建立了和平塔，用来祈祷世界和平。	
It is no coincidence that the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence were born in Asia, because they embody the Asian tradition of loving peace. The Chinese nation has always held such beliefs as "peace is most precious", "harmony without uniformity", "peace among all nations" and "universal love and non-aggression". The people of India, Myanmar and other Asian countries also cherish the values of love, kindness and peace. In one of his poems, Rabindranath Tagore, the great Indian poet, wrote that if you think friendship can be won through war, spring will fade away before your eyes. Myanmar has a World Peace Pagoda where people go to pray for world peace.
和平共处五项原则生动反映了联合国宪章宗旨和原则，并赋予这些宗旨和原则以可见、可行、可依循的内涵。和平共处五项原则中包含4个“互”字、1个“共”字，既代表了亚洲国家对国际关系的新期待，也体现了各国权利、义务、责任相统一的国际法治精神。
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence give concrete expression to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and facilitate their implementation. The key elements of the Five Principles, namely, "mutual" and "coexistence", demonstrate the new expectations the Asian countries have for international relations and the principle of international rule of law that give countries rights, obligations and responsibilities.
上个世纪50年代，在和平共处五项原则指导下，中印友好之风吹遍了两国广袤大地。当年，周恩来总理访问印度时，到处可以听到“潘查希拉金达巴”（五项原则万岁）、“印地秦尼巴伊巴伊”（印中人民是兄弟）的欢呼声。中缅在和平共处五项原则指导下妥善解决了边界问题，1960年两国签署边界条约，这是新中国同周边邻国签订的第一个边界条约。中缅两国还签署了中缅友好和互不侵犯条约，这是亚洲国家间首个和平友好条约。	
In the 1950s, guided by the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, the wind of friendship swept across the vast land of China and India. When Premier Zhou Enlai visited India, everywhere he went, the local people greeted him with "Panchsheel Zindabad", which means long live the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and "Hindi-Chini Bhai Bhai", which means Indians and Chinese are brothers. Under the guidance of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, China and Myanmar settled the boundary issue. The China-Myanmar boundary treaty signed in 1960 is the first boundary treaty the People's Republic of China signed with its neighbors. The Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Non-Aggression between China and Myanmar is also the first treaty of peace and friendship between Asian countries.
60年来，和平共处五项原则不仅在中国、印度、缅甸生根发芽、深入人心，而且走向亚洲、走向世界，中国、印度、缅甸都为此作出了重要贡献。中方认为，总结国际关系实践，和平共处五项原则是具有强大生命力的。印方认为，如果和平共处五项原则在所有国家相互关系中获得认可，那么世界就几乎不会有任何冲突和战争。缅方表示，和平共处五项原则对一切国家都是适当的指导原则。	
For 60 years, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have struck deep roots and flourished in China, India and Myanmar. Meanwhile, thanks to the important contribution made by the three countries, these principles are accepted in other parts of Asia and the world. China believes that the successful application of the Five Principles in international relations fully testifies to their strong vitality. India has said that, if these principles are recognized in mutual relations of all countries, then indeed there would hardly be any conflict and certainly no war. Myanmar also believes that the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence are appropriate guiding principles for all countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
60年来，历经国际风云变幻的考验，和平共处五项原则作为一个开放包容的国际法原则，集中体现了主权、正义、民主、法治的价值观。	
Having been tested by the evolution of international relations in the past six decades, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, as open and inclusive principles of international law, embody the values of sovereignty, justice, democracy and rule of law.
——和平共处五项原则已经成为国际关系基本准则和国际法基本原则。和平共处五项原则精辟体现了新型国际关系的本质特征，是一个相互联系、相辅相成、不可分割的统一体，适用于各种社会制度、发展水平、体量规模国家之间的关系。1955年，万隆会议通过的十项原则是对和平共处五项原则的引申和发展。上个世纪60年代兴起的不结盟运动把五项原则作为指导原则。1970年和1974年联合国大会通过的有关宣言都接受了和平共处五项原则。和平共处五项原则为当今世界一系列国际组织和国际文件所采纳，得到国际社会广泛赞同和遵守。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have become the basic norms governing international relations as well as basic principles of international law. These Five Principles, as an integrated, interconnected and indivisible concept, capture the essence of today's international relations, and can apply to relations among all countries regardless of their social system, stage of development or size. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence were expanded into ten principles adopted at the Bandung Conference in 1955. The Non-Aligned Movement which emerged in the 1960s adopted the Five Principles as its guiding principles. These principles were also incorporated in the relevant declarations adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1970 and 1974. Today, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence are also endorsed by a host of international organizations and international instruments, and are widely supported and observed by the international community.
——和平共处五项原则有力维护了广大发展中国家权益。和平共处五项原则的精髓，就是所有国家主权一律平等，反对任何国家垄断国际事务。这为广大发展中国家捍卫国家主权和独立提供了强大思想武器，成为发展中国家团结合作、联合自强的旗帜，加深了广大发展中国家相互理解和信任，促进了南南合作，也推动了南北关系改善和发展。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have effectively upheld the rights and interests of the developing world. The core of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence is that there is sovereign equality among all countries and that no country should monopolize international affairs. These principles offer a powerful intellectual tool for developing countries to uphold their sovereignty and independence, and they have thus become a rallying call for enhancing solidarity, cooperation and strength among them. These principles have deepened the mutual understanding and trust among developing countries, boosted South-South cooperation and also contributed to the improvement of North-South relations.
——和平共处五项原则为推动建立更加公正合理的国际政治经济秩序发挥了积极作用。和平共处五项原则摒弃了弱肉强食的丛林法则，壮大了反帝反殖力量，加速了殖民体系崩溃瓦解。在东西方冷战对峙的大背景下，所谓“大家庭”、“集团政治”、“势力范围”等方式都没有处理好国与国关系，反而带来了矛盾、激化了局势。与之形成鲜明对照的是，和平共处五项原则为和平解决国家间历史遗留问题及国际争端开辟了崭新道路。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have played a positive role in building a more equitable and rational international political and economic order. Rejecting the law of the jungle by which the strong bullies the weak, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence strengthened the movement against imperialism and colonialism that eventually brought colonialism to an end. During the Cold War of East-West confrontation, none of the policies such as "the big family", "bloc politics" or "sphere of influence" was successful in handling state-to-state relations, and they only heightened antagonism and tension. By contrast, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence provided a new approach for peacefully resolving historical issues and international disputes.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在发生深刻复杂的变化，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流更加强劲，国际社会日益成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。同时，国际关系中的不公正不平等现象仍很突出，全球性挑战层出不穷，各种地区冲突和局部战争此起彼伏，不少国家的民众特别是儿童依然生活在战火硝烟之中，不少发展中国家人民依然承受着饥寒的煎熬。维护世界和平、促进共同发展，依然任重道远。	
Today's world is going through profound and intricate changes. Peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit have become an unstoppable trend. Countries are bound together in this community of common destiny. On the other hand, injustice and inequality are still pronounced problems in international relations. Global challenges keep emerging, so do conflicts and local wars in various regions. People in many countries, children in particular, are ravaged by war. Many people in developing countries still suffer from hunger. To uphold global peace and promote common development remains a daunting challenge facing mankind.
新形势下，和平共处五项原则的精神不是过时了，而是历久弥新；和平共处五项原则的意义不是淡化了，而是历久弥深；和平共处五项原则的作用不是削弱了，而是历久弥坚。	
In the new era today, the spirit of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, instead of being outdated, remains as relevant as ever; its significance, rather than diminishing, remains as important as ever; and its role, rather than being weakened, has continued to grow.
“凡益之道，与时偕行。”刚才，吴登盛总统、安萨里副总统都对新形势下坚持和弘扬和平共处五项原则、推动建设新型国际关系和美好世界谈了很好的想法和主张。在这个问题上，中国、印度、缅甸有着广泛共识。我愿谈几点看法。	
As an ancient Chinese teaching goes, all good principles should adapt to changing times to remain relevant. Just now, both President U Thein Sein and Vice President Hamid Ansari have elaborated on how to carry forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence to build a new type of international relations and a better world in the new era. Indeed, China, India and Myanmar have a lot in common in this regard. Here, I wish to state the following:
第一，坚持主权平等。主权是国家独立的根本标志，也是国家利益的根本体现和可靠保证。主权和领土完整不容侵犯，各国应该尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切。这些都是硬道理，任何时候都不能丢弃，任何时候都不应动摇。	
First, we should uphold sovereign equality. Sovereignty is the most important feature of any independent state as well as the embodiment and safeguard of its national interests. No infringement upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a country is allowed. Countries should respect each other's core interests and key concerns. These are fundamental rules which should not be cast aside or undermined at any time.
国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会平等成员，都有平等参与国际事务的权利。各国的事务应该由各国人民自己来管。我们要尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，反对出于一己之利或一己之见，采用非法手段颠覆别国合法政权。	
All countries, regardless of their size, strength or level of development, are equal members of the international community, and they are entitled to equal participation in international affairs. The internal affairs of a country should be managed by its own people. We should respect the right of a country to choose its own social system and model of development, and oppose the attempt to oust the legitimate government of a country through illegal means to seek self interests or to impose one's own views.
第二，坚持共同安全。安全应该是普遍的。各国都有平等参与国际和地区安全事务的权利，也都有维护国际和地区安全的责任。我们要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续安全的理念，尊重和保障每一个国家的安全。不能一个国家安全而其他国家不安全，一部分国家安全而另一部分国家不安全，更不能牺牲别国安全谋求自身所谓绝对安全。我们要加强国际和地区合作，共同应对日益增多的非传统安全威胁，坚决打击一切形式的恐怖主义，铲除恐怖主义滋生的土壤。	
Second, we should uphold common security. Security should be universal. All countries have the right to participate in international and regional security affairs on an equal footing and shoulder the shared responsibility to maintain security both internationally and in various regions. We should champion common, comprehensive, cooperative, and sustainable security, and respect and ensure every country's security. It is unacceptable to have security just for one country or some countries while leaving the rest insecure, and still less should one be allowed to seek the so-called "absolute security" of itself at the expense of others' security. We need to step up cooperation at the global and regional level and jointly counter non-traditional security threats which are on the increase, fight against terrorism of all forms and remove the breeding ground of terrorism.
对待国家间存在的分歧和争端，要坚持通过对话协商以和平方式解决，以对话增互信，以对话解纷争，以对话促安全，不能动辄诉诸武力或以武力相威胁。热衷于使用武力，不是强大的表现，而是道义贫乏、理念苍白的表现。只有基于道义、理念的安全，才是基础牢固、真正持久的安全。我们要推动建设开放、透明、平等的亚太安全合作新架构，推动各国共同维护地区和世界和平安全。	
Disputes and differences between countries should be resolved through dialogue, consultation and peaceful means. We should increase mutual trust, and settle disputes and promote security through dialogue. Willful threat or use of force should be rejected. Flexing military muscles only reveals the lack of moral ground or vision rather than reflecting one's strength. Security can be solid and enduring only if it is based on moral high ground and vision. We should work for a new architecture of Asia-Pacific security cooperation that is open, transparent and equality-based, and bring all countries together in a common endeavor to maintain peace and security in both our region and the world.
第三，坚持共同发展。天空足够大，地球足够大，世界也足够大，容得下各国共同发展繁荣。一些国家越来越富裕，另一些国家长期贫穷落后，这样的局面是不可持续的。水涨船高，小河有水大河满，大家发展才能发展大家。各国在谋求自身发展时，应该积极促进其他国家共同发展，让发展成果更多更好惠及各国人民。	
Third, we should advance common development. The sky, earth and world are big enough to allow the common development and prosperity of all countries. Today, some countries are getting richer while others are locked in poverty and underdevelopment. Such a situation should not be allowed to continue. Just as rising water lifts all boats and more water in the tributaries make a wider river, all will benefit when everyone develops. When developing themselves, countries should work actively for common development of others so that the gains of development will reach more people in the world.
我们要共同维护和发展开放型世界经济，共同促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，坚持开放的区域合作，反对各种形式的保护主义，反对任何以邻为壑、转嫁危机的意图和做法。	
We should jointly uphold and develop an open global economy, promote strong, sustainable and balanced global growth as well as trade and investment liberalization and facilitation and uphold open regional cooperation. We should oppose protectionism of all forms and any attempt or practice to hurt others' interests or shift crisis to others.
我们要推动南南合作和南北对话，增强发展中国家自主发展能力，推动发达国家承担更多责任，努力缩小南北差距，建立更加平等均衡的新型全球发展伙伴关系，夯实世界经济长期稳定发展基础。	
We should enhance South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue, strengthen developing countries' capacity for self-development, urge developed countries to shoulder more responsibilities, and narrow the North-South gap. This will help build a more equal and more balanced new global partnership for development and cement the foundation for achieving long-term and stable global growth.
第四，坚持合作共赢。“合则强，孤则弱。”合作共赢应该成为各国处理国际事务的基本政策取向。合作共赢是普遍适用的原则，不仅适用于经济领域，而且适用于政治、安全、文化等其他领域。	
Fourth, we should promote win-win cooperation. "Cooperation generates strength while isolation only leads to weakness." Win-win cooperation should be the basic policy goal of all countries in handling international affairs. It is a universal principle that applies to not only the economic field, but political, security, cultural and other areas as well.
我们应该把本国利益同各国共同利益结合起来，努力扩大各方共同利益的汇合点，不能这边搭台、那边拆台，要相互补台、好戏连台。要积极树立双赢、多赢、共赢的新理念，摒弃你输我赢、赢者通吃的旧思维，“各美其美，美人之美，美美与共，天下大同”。	
Countries should align their own interests with those of other countries and expand areas of converging interests. Instead of undercutting each other's efforts, countries should reinforce each other's endeavor and make greater common progress. We should champion a new vision of win-win outcomes for all and reject the obsolete notion of zero-sum game or winner taking all. Countries should respect others' interests while pursuing their own and advance common interests of all.
我们要坚持同舟共济、权责共担，携手应对气候变化、能源资源安全、网络安全、重大自然灾害等日益增多的全球性问题，共同呵护人类赖以生存的地球家园。	
We should help each other out in times of difficulty and assume both rights and responsibilities. We should work together to address growing global issues such as climate change, energy and resources security, cyber security and major natural disasters, in a common endeavor to protect our planet which is so crucial to our survival.
第五，坚持包容互鉴。文明多样性是人类社会的基本特征。当今世界有70亿人口，200多个国家和地区，2500多个民族，5000多种语言。不同民族、不同文明多姿多彩、各有千秋，没有优劣之分，只有特色之别。	
Fifth, we should champion inclusiveness and mutual learning. Diversity of civilizations is a defining feature of the human society. In today's world, there are 7 billion people of more than 2,500 ethnic groups who live in over 200 countries and regions and speak more than 5,000 languages. Different nations and civilizations are rich in diversity and have their own distinct features. No one is superior or inferior to others.
“万物并育而不相害，道并行而不相悖。”我们要尊重文明多样性，推动不同文明交流对话、和平共处、和谐共生，不能唯我独尊、贬低其他文明和民族。人类历史告诉我们，企图建立单一文明的一统天下，只是一种不切实际的幻想。	
"All living things are nourished without injuring one another, and all roads run parallel without interfering with one another." We should respect diversity of civilizations and promote exchanges, dialogue, peaceful and harmonious coexistence among different civilizations and should not seek supremacy or denigrate other civilizations and nations. Human history tells us that any attempt to establish a dominant civilization in the world is an illusion.
尺有所短，寸有所长。我们要倡导交流互鉴，注重汲取不同国家、不同民族创造的优秀文明成果，取长补短，兼收并蓄，共同绘就人类文明美好画卷。	
Everything has its strengths and weaknesses. We should promote mutual learning and draw on all that is good created by different countries, nations and civilizations in a joint effort to create a splendid human civilization.
第六，坚持公平正义。“大道之行也，天下为公。”公平正义是世界各国人民在国际关系领域追求的崇高目标。在当今国际关系中，公平正义还远远没有实现。	
Sixth, we should uphold fairness and justice. According to the ancient Chinese philosophy, "A just cause should be pursued for the common good". Justice is the noble goal that people of all countries pursue in international relations. However, we are still far away from realizing this goal.
我们应该共同推动国际关系民主化。世界的命运必须由各国人民共同掌握，世界上的事情应该由各国政府和人民共同商量来办。垄断国际事务的想法是落后于时代的，垄断国际事务的行动也肯定是不能成功的。	
We should jointly promote greater democracy in international relations. The destiny of the world must be determined by people of all countries, and world affairs should be managed through consultation by governments and peoples of all countries. The notion of dominating international affairs belongs to a different age, and such an attempt is doomed to failure.
我们应该共同推动国际关系法治化。推动各方在国际关系中遵守国际法和公认的国际关系基本原则，用统一适用的规则来明是非、促和平、谋发展。“法者，天下之准绳也。”在国际社会中，法律应该是共同的准绳，没有只适用他人、不适用自己的法律，也没有只适用自己、不适用他人的法律。适用法律不能有双重标准。我们应该共同维护国际法和国际秩序的权威性和严肃性，各国都应该依法行使权利，反对歪曲国际法，反对以“法治”之名行侵害他国正当权益、破坏和平稳定之实。	
We should jointly promote the rule of law in international relations. We should urge all parties to abide by international law and well-recognized basic principles governing international relations and use widely applicable rules to tell right from wrong and pursue peace and development. The ancient Chinese believed that "law is the yardstick for measuring all things under the heaven". In the international society, there should be just one law that applies to all. There is no such law that applies to others but not oneself, or vice versa. There should not be double standards when applying the law. We should jointly uphold the authority and sanctity of international law and the international order. All countries should exercise their rights in accordance with the law, oppose bending international law, and reject any attempt to undermine, in the name of "rule of law", other countries' legitimate rights and interests as well as peace and stability.
我们应该共同推动国际关系合理化。适应国际力量对比新变化推进全球治理体系改革，体现各方关切和诉求，更好维护广大发展中国家正当权益。	
We should jointly promote more balanced international relations, advance reform in global governance in keeping with new changes in the relative strengths of international forces, respond to concerns and aspirations of various parties, and better uphold the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国是和平共处五项原则的积极倡导者和坚定实践者。和平共处五项原则载入了中国宪法，是中国外交政策的基石。中国是当代国际体系的参与者、建设者、贡献者。	
China champions and firmly observes the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Enshrined in China's Constitution, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence constitute the cornerstone of China's foreign policy. China is actively involved in building the current international system.
——中国将坚定不移走和平发展道路。走和平发展道路是中国根据时代发展潮流和自身根本利益作出的战略抉择。中国人民崇尚“己所不欲，勿施于人”。中国不认同“国强必霸论”，中国人的血脉中没有称王称霸、穷兵黩武的基因。中国将坚定不移沿着和平发展道路走下去，这对中国有利，对亚洲有利，对世界也有利，任何力量都不能动摇中国和平发展的信念。中国坚定维护自身的主权、安全、发展利益，也支持其他国家特别是广大发展中国家维护自身的主权、安全、发展利益。中国坚持不干涉别国内政原则，不会把自己的意志强加于人，即使再强大也永远不称霸。中国真诚希望其他国家都走和平发展道路，大家携手把这条路走稳走好。	
- China will firmly pursue peaceful development. This is a strategic choice China has made in keeping with the trend of the times and based on its fundamental interests. We Chinese believe that "no one should do to others what he does not want others to do to himself". China does not subscribe to the notion that a country is bound to seek hegemony when it grows in strength. Hegemony or militarism is simply not in the genes of the Chinese. China will unswervingly pursue peaceful development, because it is good for China, good for Asia and good for the world. Nothing can ever weaken China's commitment to peaceful development. China firmly upholds its sovereignty, security and development interests and supports other countries, developing countries in particular, in doing the same. China neither interferes in other countries' internal affairs nor imposes its will on others. It will never seek hegemony no matter how strong it may become. China truly hopes that all other countries will also pursue peaceful development, and that together, we can make steady progress in this common endeavor.
——中国将坚定不移在和平共处五项原则基础上发展同世界各国的友好合作。“凡交，近则必相靡以信，远则必忠之以言。”中国坚持按照亲、诚、惠、容的理念，深化同周边国家的互利合作，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家。中国坚持把发展中国家作为对外政策的基础，坚持正确义利观，永远做发展中国家的可靠朋友和真诚伙伴。中国重视各大国的地位和作用，致力于同各大国发展全方位合作关系，积极同美国发展新型大国关系，同俄罗斯发展全面战略协作伙伴关系，同欧洲发展和平、增长、改革、文明伙伴关系，大家一起来维护世界和平、促进共同发展。	
- China will firmly pursue friendship and cooperation with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Our ancestors believed that "mutual trust brings neighboring countries together and goodwill brings distant countries together". China is guided by the principle of boosting amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness in deepening mutually beneficial cooperation with its neighbors and strives to deliver greater gains to its neighbors through its own development. Relations with other developing countries underpin China's foreign policy and China pursues a balanced approach to upholding principles and pursuing interests. China will remain a reliable friend and sincere partner of other developing countries. China places high importance on the standing and role of other major countries and is committed to growing relations of all-round cooperation with them. We are actively working towards building a new model of major-country relationship with the United States, forging a comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination with Russia and building partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization with Europe. In short, we are ready to work with all others to uphold world peace and boost common development.
——中国将坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略。中国正在推动落实丝绸之路经济带、21世纪海上丝绸之路、孟中印缅经济走廊、中国－东盟命运共同体等重大合作倡议，中国将以此为契机全面推进新一轮对外开放，发展开放型经济体系，为亚洲和世界发展带来新的机遇和空间。	
- China will firmly pursue a win-win strategy of opening-up. China has proposed several important cooperation initiatives, namely the Silk Road economic belt, the 21st century maritime silk road, the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar economic corridor and the China-ASEAN community of common destiny. China will seize the opportunity presented by these initiatives to launch a new round of all-round opening-up, build an open economic system and create new opportunities and space for the development of Asia and the world.
当前，中国人民正在为全面建成小康社会、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。中国梦同世界各国人民的美好梦想息息相通，中国人民愿意同各国人民在实现各自梦想的过程中相互支持、相互帮助，中国愿意同各国尤其是周边邻国共同发展、共同繁荣。	
We in China are striving to finish the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and realize the Chinese dream of the great national renewal. The Chinese dream is interconnected with the dreams of the people of all other countries. The Chinese people and the people of other countries should support and help each other to realize their respective dreams. China hopes to work with all the other countries, its neighbors in particular, to achieve common development and prosperity.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
为表彰和鼓励更多人士和团体坚持和弘扬和平共处五项原则，我愿宣布，中国政府决定设立“和平共处五项原则友谊奖”和“和平共处五项原则卓越奖学金”。	
In recognition of the commitment and contribution made by groups and individuals to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and encourage more people to join this noble cause, I now announce the decision of the Chinese government to establish the "Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Friendship Award" and the "Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Scholarship of Excellence".
中国有句古话：“千里之行，始于足下。”印度有句谚语：“水滴汇成溪，稻穗集成束。”缅甸人常说：“想，要凌云壮志；干，要脚踏实地。”中国将继续做弘扬和平共处五项原则的表率，同印度、缅甸和国际社会一道，推动建设持久和平、共同繁荣的和谐世界！	
An old Chinese adage says, "A journey of one thousand miles begins with the first step." An Indian proverb goes, "Drops of water join to make a stream, and ears combine to make a crop." And people in Myanmar often say, "Be ambitious in thinking but down-to-earth in action." China will strive to be a pacesetter in observing the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. We will work with India, Myanmar and the rest of the international community to build a harmonious world of durable peace and common prosperity.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
