100. 习近平在气候变化巴黎大会开幕式上讲话
携手构建合作共赢、公平合理的气候变化治理机制
Work Together to Build a Win-Win, Equitable and Balanced Governance Mechanism on Climate Change
——在气候变化巴黎大会开幕式上的讲话
At the Opening Ceremony of The Paris Conference on Climate Change
（2015年11月30日，巴黎）
Paris, 30 November 2015
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
尊敬的奥朗德总统，
President Hollande,
尊敬的各位同事，
Dear colleagues,
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
今天，我们齐聚巴黎，出席联合国气候变化巴黎大会开幕式。这表明，恐怖主义阻挡不了全人类应对气候变化、追求美好未来的进程。借此机会，我愿向法国人民致以诚挚的慰问，同时对奥朗德总统和法国政府为这次大会召开所作的精心筹备表示感谢。
Today, we are gathering here in Paris for the opening ceremony of the United Nations Conference on Climate Change. Our presence shows that terrorism cannot hold back mankind's efforts to address climate change and pursue a better future. Let me take this opportunity to express my sincere sympathy to the French people and my gratitude to President Hollande and the French government for their meticulous preparations for this conference.
《联合国气候变化框架公约》生效20多年来，在各方共同努力下，全球应对气候变化工作取得积极进展，但仍面临许多困难和挑战。巴黎大会正是为了加强公约实施，达成一个全面、均衡、有力度、有约束力的气候变化协议，提出公平、合理、有效的全球应对气候变化解决方案，探索人类可持续的发展路径和治理模式。法国作家雨果说：“最大的决心会产生最高的智慧。”我相信，只要各方展现诚意、坚定信心、齐心协力，巴黎大会一定能够取得令人满意的成果，不辜负国际社会的热切期盼。
Thanks to joint efforts of all parties since the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change entered into force over 20 years ago, global actions on climate change have made progress although there are still numerous difficulties and challenges. This Paris Conference is hence convened to strengthen implementation of the UNFCCC and bring about a comprehensive, balanced, ambitious and binding agreement on climate change. The conference is also expected to come up with equitable, reasonable and effective global solutions to climate change and explore pathways and governance models for mankind to achieve sustainable development. The French writer Victor Hugo once observed in Les Miserables that "supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions." (Les resources supremes sortent des resolutions extremes.) I believe that with all parties making joint efforts with sincerity and confidence, the Paris Conference will yield satisfying results and meet the high expectations of the international community.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
一份成功的国际协议既要解决当下矛盾，更要引领未来。巴黎协议应该着眼于强化2020年后全球应对气候变化行动，也要为推动全球更好实现可持续发展注入动力。
A successful international agreement should not just address immediate challenges but more importantly, it should also present a vision for the future. The Paris agreement should focus on strengthening post-2020 global actions on climate change and boost global efforts to pursue sustainable development.
——巴黎协议应该有利于实现公约目标，引领绿色发展。协议应该遵循公约原则和规定，推进公约全面有效实施。既要有效控制大气温室气体浓度上升，又要建立利益导向和激励机制，推动各国走向绿色循环低碳发展，实现经济发展和应对气候变化双赢。
- The Paris agreement should help meet the goals of the UNFCCC and chart the course for green development. The agreement should follow the principles and rules set out in the UNFCCC and contribute to its full and effective implementation. The agreement should put effective control on the increase of atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases and set up incentive mechanisms to encourage countries to purse green, circular and low-carbon development featuring both economic growth and an effective response to climate change.
——巴黎协议应该有利于凝聚全球力量，鼓励广泛参与。协议应该在制度安排上促使各国同舟共济、共同努力。除各国政府，还应该调动企业、非政府组织等全社会资源参与国际合作进程，提高公众意识，形成合力。
- The Paris agreement should help galvanize global efforts and encourage broad participation. The agreement should provide institutional arrangements that propel countries to make concerted efforts. Besides governments, it should also mobilize businesses, non-governmental organizations and all players in society to participate in international cooperation on climate change, thus raising public awareness of pooling resources on climate change.
——巴黎协议应该有利于加大投入，强化行动保障。获取资金技术支持、提高应对能力是发展中国家实施应对气候变化行动的前提。发达国家应该落实到2020年每年动员1000亿美元的承诺，2020年后向发展中国家提供更加强有力的资金支持。此外，还应该向发展中国家转让气候友好型技术，帮助其发展绿色经济。
- The Paris agreement should help increase input of resources to ensure actions on climate change. To obtain financial and technical support for capacity building is essential for developing countries to address climate change. Developed countries should honor their commitment of mobilizing US$100 billion each year before 2020 and provide stronger financial support to developing countries afterwards. It is also important that climate-friendly technologies should be transferred to developing countries to help them build green economy.
——巴黎协议应该有利于照顾各国国情，讲求务实有效。应该尊重各国特别是发展中国家在国内政策、能力建设、经济结构方面的差异，不搞一刀切。应对气候变化不应该妨碍发展中国家消除贫困、提高人民生活水平的合理需求。要照顾发展中国家的特殊困难。
- The Paris agreement should accommodate the national conditions of various countries and lay emphasis on practical results. It is imperative to respect differences among countries, especially developing countries, in domestic policies, capacity building and economic structure. A one-size-fits-all approach must be avoided. Addressing climate change should not deny the legitimate needs of developing countries to reduce poverty and improve their people's living Standards. Special needs of the developing countries must be well attended to.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
巴黎协议不是终点，而是新的起点。作为全球治理的一个重要领域，应对气候变化的全球努力是一面镜子，给我们思考和探索未来全球治理模式、推动建设人类命运共同体带来宝贵启示。
The Paris Conference is not the finishing line but a new starting point. As an important part of global governance, the global efforts on climate change can be taken as a mirror for us to reflect on what models to have for future global governance and how to build a community of shared future for mankind. Much valuable inspiration may thus be drawn.
——我们应该创造一个各尽所能、合作共赢的未来。对气候变化等全球性问题，如果抱着功利主义的思维，希望多占点便宜、少承担点责任，最终将是损人不利己。巴黎大会应该摈弃“零和博弈”狭隘思维，推动各国尤其是发达国家多一点共享、多一点担当，实现互惠共赢。
- We should create a future of win-win cooperation, with each country making contribution to the best of its ability. For global issues like climate change, a take-more-give-less approach based on expediency is in nobody's interest. The Paris Conference should reject the narrow-minded mentality of "zero sum game" and call on all countries, the developed countries in particular, to assume more shared responsibilities for win-win outcomes.
——我们应该创造一个奉行法治、公平正义的未来。要提高国际法在全球治理中的地位和作用，确保国际规则有效遵守和实施，坚持民主、平等、正义，建设国际法治。发达国家和发展中国家的历史责任、发展阶段、应对能力都不同，共同但有区别的责任原则不仅没有过时，而且应该得到遵守。
- We should create a future of the rule of law, fairness and justice. It is imperative to enhance the standing and role of international law in global governance, ensure effective observance and implementation of international rules, uphold democracy, equity and justice, and build international rule of law. Given the difference between developed and developing countries in historical responsibility, developing stage and coping capability, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, instead of being obsolete, must continue to be adhered to.
——我们应该创造一个包容互鉴、共同发展的未来。面对全球性挑战，各国应该加强对话，交流学习最佳实践，取长补短，在相互借鉴中实现共同发展，惠及全体人民。同时，要倡导和而不同，允许各国寻找最适合本国国情的应对之策。
- We should create a future of inclusiveness, mutual learning and common development. Facing global challenges, countries need to increase dialogue and exchange best practices. We should draw on each other's strengths to achieve common development through mutual learning, and deliver benefits to all our people. At the same time, we should be prepared to accept harmony without uniformity, allowing individual countries to seek their own solutions that best suit their respective national conditions.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
中国一直是全球应对气候变化事业的积极参与者，有诚意、有决心为巴黎大会成功作出自己的贡献。
China has been actively engaged in the global campaign on climate change. China is both sincere and determined to contribute its share to the success of the Paris Conference.
过去几十年来，中国经济快速发展，人民生活发生了深刻变化，但也承担了资源环境方面的代价。鉴往知来，中国正在大力推进生态文明建设，推动绿色循环低碳发展。中国把应对气候变化融入国家经济社会发展中长期规划，坚持减缓和适应气候变化并重，通过法律、行政、技术、市场等多种手段，全力推进各项工作。中国可再生能源装机容量占全球总量的24%，新增装机占全球增量的42%。中国是世界节能和利用新能源、可再生能源第一大国。
In the past few decades, China has seen rapid economic growth and significant improvement in people's lives. However, this has taken a toll on the environment and resources. Having learned the lesson, China is vigorously making ecological endeavors to promote green, circular and low-carbon growth. We have integrated our climate change efforts into China's medium- and long-term program of economic and social development. We attach equal importance to mitigation and adaption, and try to make progress on all fronts by resorting to legal and administrative means, technologies and market forces. China's installed capacity of renewable energy accounts for 24% of the world's total, with the newly installed capacity accounting for 42% of the global total. China tops the world in terms of energy conservation and utilization of new and renewable energies.
“万物各得其和以生，各得其养以成。”中华文明历来强调天人合一、尊重自然。面向未来，中国将把生态文明建设作为“十三五”规划重要内容，落实创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，通过科技创新和体制机制创新，实施优化产业结构、构建低碳能源体系、发展绿色建筑和低碳交通、建立全国碳排放交易市场等一系列政策措施，形成人和自然和谐发展现代化建设新格局。中国在“国家自主贡献”中提出将于2030年左右使二氧化碳排放达到峰值并争取尽早实现，2030年单位国内生产总值二氧化碳排放比2005年下降60%－65%，非化石能源占一次能源消费比重达到20%左右，森林蓄积量比2005年增加45亿立方米左右。虽然需要付出艰苦的努力，但我们有信心和决心实现我们的承诺。
"All things live in harmony and grow with nourishments." Chinese culture values harmony between man and nature and respects nature. Going forward, ecological endeavors will feature prominently in China's 13th Five-Year Plan. China will work hard to implement the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development. China will, on the basis of technological and institutional innovation, adopt new policy measures to improve industrial mix, build low-carbon energy system, develop green building and low-carbon transportation, and build a nation-wide carbon emission trading market so as to foster a new pattern of modernization featuring harmony between man and nature. In its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, China pledges to peak CO2 emissions by around 2030 and strive to achieve it as soon as possible, and by 2030, reduce CO2 per unit of GDP by 60-65% over the 2005 level, raise the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to about 20% and increase forest stock by around 4.5 billion cubic meters over 2005. This requires strenuous efforts, but we have confidence and resolve to fulfill our commitments.
中国坚持正确义利观，积极参与气候变化国际合作。多年来，中国政府认真落实气候变化领域南南合作政策承诺，支持发展中国家特别是最不发达国家、内陆发展中国家、小岛屿发展中国家应对气候变化挑战。为加大支持力度，中国在今年9月宣布设立200亿元人民币的中国气候变化南南合作基金。中国将于明年启动在发展中国家开展10个低碳示范区、100个减缓和适应气候变化项目及1000个应对气候变化培训名额的合作项目，继续推进清洁能源、防灾减灾、生态保护、气候适应型农业、低碳智慧型城市建设等领域的国际合作，并帮助他们提高融资能力。
China upholds the values of friendship, justice and shared interests, and takes an active part in international cooperation on climate change. Over the years, the Chinese government has earnestly fulfilled its policy commitments of South-South cooperation regarding climate change to support developing countries, especially the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing states, in confronting the challenge of climate change. In a show of greater support, China announced in September the establishment of an RMB 20 billion South-South Climate Cooperation Fund. Next year, China will launch cooperation projects to set up 10 pilot low-carbon industrial parks and start 100 mitigation and adaptation programs in other developing countries and provide them with 1,000 training opportunities on climate change. China will continue to promote international cooperation in such areas as clean energy, disaster prevention and mitigation, ecological protection, climate-smart agriculture, and low-carbon and smart cities. China will also help other developing countries to increase their financing capacity.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
应对气候变化是人类共同的事业，世界的目光正聚焦于巴黎。让我们携手努力，为推动建立公平有效的全球应对气候变化机制、实现更高水平全球可持续发展、构建合作共赢的国际关系作出贡献！
Tackling climate change is a shared mission for mankind. All eyes are now on Paris. Let us join hands to contribute to the establishment of an equitable and effective global mechanism on climate change, work for global sustainable development at a higher level and bring about new international relations featuring win-win cooperation.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
