54. 习近平在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十八次会议上的讲话
弘扬“上海精神”　构建命运共同体
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十八次会议上的讲话
（2018年6月10日，青岛）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Carrying Forward the Shanghai Spirit to Build a Community with a Shared Future 
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the 18th Meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of The Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
Qingdao, June 10, 2018
尊敬的各位同事：
Dear colleagues,
六月的青岛，风景如画。在这美好的时节，欢迎大家来到这里，出席上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十八次会议。早在2500多年前，中国古代伟大的思想家孔子就说：“有朋自远方来，不亦乐乎？”今天，孔子的故乡山东喜迎远道而来的各方贵宾，我们在这里共商上海合作组织发展大计，具有特殊意义。
In this lovely season of June, I am delighted to welcome all of you to the picturesque city of Qingdao for the 18th meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). Over 2,500 years ago, Confucius, the great Chinese philosopher, had this to say: "What a joy to have friends coming from afar!" It is therefore of special significance that I host my distinguished guests in Shandong, the home province of Confucius, for a summit that will chart the future course for the SCO.
再过5天，上海合作组织将迎来17岁生日。抚今追昔，本组织走过了不平凡的发展历程，取得了重大成就。
In five days, the SCO will celebrate its 17th birthday, an occasion for us to review our organization's remarkable journey and important achievements.
17年来，我们以《上海合作组织宪章》、《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》为遵循，构建起不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三方的建设性伙伴关系。这是国际关系理论和实践的重大创新，开创了区域合作新模式，为地区和平与发展作出了新贡献。
Over the past 17 years, guided by the SCO Charter and the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation Between the Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, we have forged a constructive partnership featuring non-alliance, non-confrontation and not targeting any third party. In doing so, we have achieved a major breakthrough in the theories and practices of international relations, created a new model for regional cooperation, and made new contribution to peace and development in our region.
今天，上海合作组织是世界上幅员最广、人口最多的综合性区域合作组织，成员国的经济和人口总量分别约占全球的20%和40%。上海合作组织拥有4个观察员国、6个对话伙伴，并同联合国等国际和地区组织建立了广泛的合作关系，国际影响力不断提升，已经成为促进世界和平与发展、维护国际公平正义不可忽视的重要力量。
Today, the SCO stands as a comprehensive regional cooperation organization that covers the largest area and population in the world. Its members account for about 20 percent of the global economy and 40 percent of its population. The SCO has four observer states and six dialogue partners as well as extensive cooperation linkages with the United Nations and other international and regional organizations. With its ever rising international influence, the SCO has become an important force for promoting global peace and development and upholding international justice and fairness.
上海合作组织始终保持旺盛生命力、强劲合作动力，根本原因在于它创造性地提出并始终践行“上海精神”，主张互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展。这超越了文明冲突、冷战思维、零和博弈等陈旧观念，掀开了国际关系史崭新的一页，得到国际社会日益广泛的认同。
The SCO enjoys strong vitality and momentum of cooperation. This, in the final analysis, is attributed to the Shanghai Spirit, a creative vision initiated and followed through by the SCO that champions mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations and pursuit of common development. The Shanghai Spirit, transcending outdated concepts such as clash of civilizations, Cold War and zero-sum mentality, has opened a new page in the history of international relations and gained increasing endorsement of the international community.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
“孔子登东山而小鲁，登泰山而小天下”。面对世界大发展大变革大调整的新形势，为更好推进人类文明进步事业，我们必须登高望远，正确认识和把握世界大势和时代潮流。
Mencius, another ancient Chinese philosopher, aptly observed, "When Confucius looks down from the peak of the Dongshan Mountain, the local Kingdom of Lu comes into view; when he looks down from the peak of Mount Tai, the whole land comes into view." At a time when the world is undergoing major developments, transformation and adjustment, we must aim high and look far, and keep pace with the underlying trend of both the world and our times to push for more progress of human civilization.
尽管当今世界霸权主义和强权政治依然存在，但推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理方向发展的呼声不容忽视，国际关系民主化已成为不可阻挡的时代潮流。
While hegemony and power politics still persist in this world, the growing call for a more just and equitable international order must be heeded. Democracy in international relations has become an unstoppable trend of the times.
尽管各种传统和非传统安全威胁不断涌现，但捍卫和平的力量终将战胜破坏和平的势力，安全稳定是人心所向。
While various traditional and non-traditional security threats keep emerging, the force for peace will prevail, for security and stability are what people long for.
尽管单边主义、贸易保护主义、逆全球化思潮不断有新的表现，但“地球村”的世界决定了各国日益利益交融、命运与共，合作共赢是大势所趋。
While unilateralism, trade protectionism and backlash against globalization are taking new forms, in this global village of ours where countries' interests and future are so interconnected, the pursuit of cooperation for mutual benefit represents a surging trend.
尽管文明冲突、文明优越等论调不时沉渣泛起，但文明多样性是人类进步的不竭动力，不同文明交流互鉴是各国人民共同愿望。
While we keep hearing such rhetoric as the clash of civilizations or the superiority of one civilization over another, it is the diversity of civilizations that sustains human progress. Indeed, mutual learning between different cultures is a shared aspiration of all peoples.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
当前，世界发展既充满希望，也面临挑战，我们的未来无比光明，但前方的道路不会平坦。我们要进一步弘扬“上海精神”，破解时代难题，化解风险挑战。
The world today faces both opportunities and challenges. The road ahead, bumpy as it may be, will lead to a promising future. We should stay committed to the Shanghai Spirit, surmount difficulties, defuse risks and meet challenges head on.
——我们要提倡创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展观，实现各国经济社会协同进步，解决发展不平衡带来的问题，缩小发展差距，促进共同繁荣。
-- We should uphold innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development, achieve coordinated social and economic progress of various countries and resolve issues caused by unbalanced development. We should bridge the gap in development and promote shared prosperity.
——我们要践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，摒弃冷战思维、集团对抗，反对以牺牲别国安全换取自身绝对安全的做法，实现普遍安全。
-- We should pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should reject the Cold War mentality and confrontation between blocs and oppose the practices of seeking absolute security of oneself at the expense of others, so as to achieve security of all.
——我们要秉持开放、融通、互利、共赢的合作观，拒绝自私自利、短视封闭的狭隘政策，维护世界贸易组织规则，支持多边贸易体制，构建开放型世界经济。
-- We should promote open and inclusive cooperation for win-win outcomes. We should reject self-centered, short-sighted and closed-door policies. We should uphold WTO rules and support the multilateral trading system so as to build an open world economy.
——我们要树立平等、互鉴、对话、包容的文明观，以文明交流超越文明隔阂，以文明互鉴超越文明冲突，以文明共存超越文明优越。
-- We should champion equality, mutual learning, dialogue and inclusiveness between civilizations. It is important that we overcome cultural misunderstanding, clash and supremacy through exchanges, mutual learning and coexistence.
——我们要坚持共商共建共享的全球治理观，不断改革完善全球治理体系，推动各国携手建设人类命运共同体。
-- We should follow the principle of achieving shared growth through discussion and collaboration in engaging in global governance. We should reform and improve the global governance system, and work with all other countries to build a community with shared future for humanity.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
“上海精神”是我们共同的财富，上海合作组织是我们共同的家园。我们要继续在“上海精神”指引下，同舟共济，精诚合作，齐心协力构建上海合作组织命运共同体，推动建设新型国际关系，携手迈向持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。为此，我愿提出以下建议。
The Shanghai Spirit is our shared asset, and the SCO is our shared home. We should, guided by the Shanghai Spirit, work closely to build an SCO community with a shared future, move toward a new type of international relations, and build an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace, universal security, and common prosperity. To this end, I would like to propose the following:
第一，凝聚团结互信的强大力量。我们要全面落实青岛宣言、长期睦邻友好合作条约实施纲要等文件，尊重各自选择的发展道路，兼顾彼此核心利益和重大关切，通过换位思考增进相互理解，通过求同存异促进和睦团结，不断增强组织的凝聚力和向心力。
First, we need to build up strength of unity and mutual trust. We should ensure full implementation of the Qingdao Declaration, the Outline for the Implementation of the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation, and other documents. We should respect each other's choice of development paths and accommodate each other's core interests and major concerns. We should enhance mutual understanding by putting ourselves in others' positions and boost harmony and unity by seeking common ground and setting aside differences. This will enhance the cohesion and appeal of our organization.
第二，筑牢和平安全的共同基础。我们要积极落实打击“三股势力”2019至2021年合作纲要，继续举行“和平使命”等联合反恐演习，强化防务安全、执法安全、信息安全合作。要发挥“上海合作组织－阿富汗联络组”作用，促进阿富汗和平重建进程。未来3年，中方愿利用中国－上海合作组织国际司法交流合作培训基地等平台，为各方培训2000名执法人员，强化执法能力建设。
Second, we need to strengthen the foundation for shared peace and security. We need to actively implement the 2019-2021 program of cooperation for combating "three evil forces" of terrorism, separatism and extremism, continue to conduct the "Peace Mission" and other joint counter-terrorism exercises, and enhance cooperation on defense security, law enforcement security and information security. We need to give full play to the role of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group to facilitate peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan. China offers to train 2,000 law enforcement officers for all parties in the next three years through China National Institute for SCO International Exchange and Judicial Cooperation and other platforms to enhance law enforcement capacity building.
第三，打造共同发展繁荣的强劲引擎。我们要促进发展战略对接，本着共商共建共享原则，推进“一带一路”建设，加快地区贸易便利化进程，加紧落实国际道路运输便利化协定等合作文件。中国欢迎各方积极参与今年11月将在上海举办的首届中国国际进口博览会。中国政府支持在青岛建设中国－上海合作组织地方经贸合作示范区，还将设立“中国－上海合作组织法律服务委员会”，为经贸合作提供法律支持。
Third, we need to build a powerful engine to achieve common development and prosperity. We should increase complementarity of our respective development strategies, continue to advance the Belt and Road cooperation under the principle of delivering shared benefits through extensive consultation and joint contribution, accelerate regional trade facilitation, and step up the implementation of the Agreement on International Road Transport Facilitation and other cooperation documents. China will welcome all parties to the first China International Import Expo to be held in Shanghai in November this year. The Chinese government supports building a demonstration area in Qingdao for China-SCO local economic and trade cooperation, and will set up a committee of legal services for SCO member states to provide legal support for business cooperation.
我宣布，中方将在上海合作组织银行联合体框架内设立300亿元人民币等值专项贷款。
In this connection, I hereby announce that China will set up an RMB 30 billion equivalent special lending facility within the framework of the SCO Inter-bank Consortium.
第四，拉紧人文交流合作的共同纽带。我们要积极落实成员国环保合作构想等文件，继续办好青年交流营等品牌项目，扎实推进教育、科技、文化、旅游、卫生、减灾、媒体等各领域合作。未来3年，中方将为各成员国提供3000个人力资源开发培训名额，增强民众对上海合作组织大家庭的了解和认同。中方愿利用风云二号气象卫星为各方提供气象服务。
Fourth, we need to forge closer ties through cultural and people-to-people exchanges. We should actively implement the outline for environmental protection cooperation and other documents, ensure the continued success of such well-recognized programs as the youth exchange camp, and secure solid progress in cooperation in education, science and technology, culture, tourism, health, disaster relief and media. In the next three years, China will provide 3,000 training opportunities of human resources development for SCO member states to enhance public understanding of and support for the SCO family. China offers to provide meteorological services to all parties using its Fengyun-2 weather satellites.
第五，共同拓展国际合作的伙伴网络。我们要强化同观察员国、对话伙伴等地区国家交流合作，密切同联合国等国际和地区组织的伙伴关系，同国际货币基金组织、世界银行等国际金融机构开展对话，为推动化解热点问题、完善全球治理作出贡献。
Fifth, we need to expand partnership networks of international cooperation. By intensifying exchanges and cooperation with SCO observer states, dialogue partners, and other countries in our region, by enhancing partnerships with the United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and by engaging in dialogue with the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and other international financial institutions, we can contribute our share to resolving hotspot issues and improving global governance.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
一年来，在各成员国大力支持和帮助下，中方完成了主席国工作，并举办了本次峰会。在这里，我向大家表示诚挚的谢意。中方愿同各成员国一道，本着积极务实、友好合作的精神，全面落实本次会议的共识，支持下一任主席国吉尔吉斯斯坦的工作，携手创造本组织更加光明的美好未来！
Thanks to the support and assistance of all the other SCO member states over the past year, China has completed its SCO presidency and hosted this summit. Here I wish to express my sincere thanks to you all. China will maintain active, practical and friendly cooperation with other SCO member states to ensure the full implementation of the consensus reached at this summit and support Kyrgyzstan in its SCO presidency. Let us join hands to create an even brighter future for the SCO!
谢谢各位。
Thank you.
