110. 习近平主席在联合国教科文组织第九届青年论坛开幕式上的贺词
亲爱的青年朋友们：	
Dear Young Friends,
值此第九届青年论坛开幕暨联合国教科文组织成立70周年之际，我谨代表中国政府和人民，并以我个人的名义，对论坛的举行表示热烈的祝贺！	
On the occasion of the opening of the ninth UNESCO Youth Forum and the 70th anniversary of the founding of UNESCO, I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, warm congratulations to the opening of the forum!
本届论坛以“推动可持续发展，塑造全球公民”为主题，对促进可持续发展、开展文明对话具有重要意义。前不久，联合国可持续发展峰会通过了2030年可持续发展议程。落实好这项议程确定的目标，建立一个公平、包容、可持续的地球，是包括全球青年在内的每个人都要重视和担当的责任。	
Themed on Young Global Citizens for a Sustainable Planet, this forum is highly relevant to promoting sustainable development and dialogue among civilizations. Not long ago, the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Meeting the targets set by the agenda and building a fair, inclusive and sustainable world is the responsibility that all of us, including young people across the world, need to come forward to undertake.
青年最富有朝气，最富有梦想，是未来的领导者和建设者。中国重视、关怀、信任青年，支持青年发展自身、贡献社会、造福人民，在实现中国梦的历史进程中放飞青春梦想。
Filled with vigor and full of dreams, young people are the leaders and creators of the future. China values, cares about and plays trust in the young people. We support them as they aspire to pursue personal development, contribute to the community and serve the larger population. They will have every opportunity to make their dreams come true in the historical process of realizing the Chinese dream.
世界的未来属于年轻一代。全球青年有理想、有担当，人类就有希望，推进人类和平与发展的崇高事业就有源源不断的强大力量。希望各国青年用欣赏、互鉴、共享的观点看待世界，推动不同文明交流互鉴、和谐共生，积极为构建人类命运共同体添砖献瓦。	
The future of the world is in the hands of the younger generation. When young people around the world pursue their ideals and fulfill their responsibilities, mankind will have a more promising future, and there will be an inexhaustible source of strength to support the lofty cause of peace and development. I hope that young people of all countries could see the world with appreciation and in a spirit of sharing and mutual learning, promote exchanges and harmony among different cultures, and contribute to the building of a community of shared future of mankind.
预祝本届青年论坛圆满成功！	
I wish the forum a complete success!
