111. 习近平接受路透社书面采访
问：您即将对英国进行国事访问。据悉英国王室和政府高度重视您的这次重要访问并做了精心安排。在上世纪90年代您曾经访问过英国，您对英国印象如何?对时隔20多年再次访问英国有何期待?这次访问会对中英关系和中欧关系产生怎样的影响?一些英国人对中国仍然抱有疑虑，认为英国政府急于讨好中国，如何保证英中关系互利互惠?
1. You will soon pay a state visit to the UK. It is learned that both the royal family and the government of the UK attach great importance to your visit and are making meticulous preparations for it. You visited the UK in the 1990s and what was your impression then? What do you expect from your coming visit to the UK after more than 20 years? What will be its impact on China-UK relations and China-EU relations? Some Britons fear China's intentions and believe that the British government is too eager to please China. How do you ensure that China-UK relationship is mutually beneficial?
答：1994年，我访问过伦敦、牛津、格拉斯哥、爱丁堡等地。那次访问给我留下了深刻印象，特别是英国悠久的历史、独特的文化、友好的人民、优美的环境令人难忘。
A: I visited London, Oxford, Glasgow and Edinburgh in 1994. I was deeply impressed by the visit, particularly Britain's long history, unique culture, friendly people and its beautiful environment.
这次我应伊丽莎白二世女王邀请对英国进行国事访问，期待着同英国领导人和各界朋友共商两国关系发展大计，为今后一个时期中英关系绘制路线图，为两国各领域务实合作注入新动力，共同开启中英全面战略伙伴关系的“黄金时代”。
During my upcoming state visit to the UK at the invitation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, I look forward to having discussions with British leaders and engaging the British public on our bilateral ties. I hope this will chart the course for the future growth of China-UK relations, inject new impetus in practical cooperation between our two countries in all fields and enable us to jointly usher in a "golden time" for China-UK comprehensive strategic partnership.
有关民意调查显示，英国民众对中国持较高的好感度。中英两国人民相互欣赏对方创造的悠久而特殊的文化，这是两国关系发展的重要基础和有利条件。当然，也有人对中英合作抱有这样那样的疑虑。我想强调的是，当今世界，任何国家都不能关起门来搞建设。打开门，就要热情接待四方来客。对客人热情周到，是世界公认的待客之道。英国表示愿做对华最开放的西方国家，这是一个明智的战略选择，也完全符合英国自身的长远利益。中国期待着同英国在更大范围、更高水平、更深层次上开展合作。
Public opinion surveys conducted in Britain show that views of China are largely favorable among the British people. Our two peoples appreciate each other's time-honored and unique cultures. This is an important foundation and favorable condition for growing bilateral ties. It is true that some people have some misgivings about China-UK cooperation. What I want to stress is that in today's world, no country can afford to pursue development with its door closed. One should open the door, warmly welcome friends and be hospitable to them. This is recognized international practice. The UK has stated that it will be the Western country that is most open to China. This is a visionary and strategic choice that fully meets Britain's own long-term interest. China looks forward to engaging with the UK in a wider range, at a higher level and in greater depth.
近年来，世界经济增长总体放缓，但中英两国投资经贸合作持续发展。英国已经成为欧盟内第二大对华投资国、中国在欧盟内第二大贸易伙伴和投资目的国，中国则是英国在欧盟外第二大贸易伙伴。2014年，中英双边贸易额首次突破800亿美元，中国自英国进口额5年内增长了两倍。中英双向投资增长迅猛。过去3年，中国对英国投资年均增长71.7%。去年，英国对中国投资同比增长87.6%，增速位居欧盟大国首位。
In recent years, while global growth has slowed down, China-UK investment and business cooperation has kept growing. The UK has become the EU's second largest investor in China as well as China's second largest trading partner and investment destination in the EU. China has been the UK's second largest non-EU trading partner. In 2014, China-UK trade volume for the first time exceeded 80 billion U.S. dollars, and China's import from the UK has doubled in five years. Two-way investment between China and the UK has grown rapidly. China's investment in the UK has risen at an annual rate of 71.7 percent over the past three years. Last year, the UK investment in China increased by 87.6 percent year-on-year, the fastest among major EU countries.
当前，英国政府制定了基础设施改造升级、打造“英格兰北部经济中心”、“英国工业2050战略”等宏大计划，这与中国提出的“一带一路”倡议、“中国制造2025”、“互联网+”等有很多合作契合点。中国愿同英国一道，秉持包容开放、合作共赢理念，提高合作水平，拓展合作领域，更好造福两国人民。
The British government has introduced ambitious plans on upgrading infrastructure, building the Northern Powerhouse in the north of England and implementing the strategy of UK Industry 2050. These plans and the "Road and Belt Initiative" and the initiatives of "Made in China 2025" and "Internet Plus" undertaken by China complement each other in many ways. China is ready to partner with the UK in the spirit of inclusiveness, opening up and seeking win-win progress through cooperation to upgrade and expand cooperation to deliver more benefits to our two peoples.
今年是中英全面战略伙伴关系第二个10年的开局之年，也是中欧建交40周年。中英关系和中欧关系发展面临继往开来的重要机遇。英国是欧盟重要成员国，中英关系同中欧关系相辅相成。去年，我对欧盟总部进行访问，同欧盟领导人一致商定，要打造中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系。相信中英关系新发展将为中欧关系全面推进注入新动力，为促进中欧四大伙伴关系建设作出新贡献。
This year marks the beginning of the second decade of the China-UK comprehensive strategic partnership and the 40th anniversary of China-EU diplomatic ties. Both China-UK relationship and China-EU relationship face important opportunities to build on past success for new progress. Since the UK is an important member of the EU, China-UK relationship and China-EU relationship reinforce each other. During my visit to the EU Headquarters last year, EU leaders and I agreed to build China-EU partnership of peace, growth, reform and civilization. I believe new progress in China-UK relationship will inject new momentum into the growth of China-EU relationship across the board and make new contribution to the building of China-EU partnership as a whole.
问：伦敦是全球金融中心之一。无论是作为人民币离岸交易中心，还是今后通过实现“伦沪通”，伦敦希望在中国金融市场发展过程中扮演重要角色。您认为在中国金融市场现代化和全球化发展进程中，伦敦能够发挥什么样的作用?
2. London is one of the world's financial centers, and is keen to play an important role in China's financial development, whether by serving as an offshore trading hub for the renminbi or by possibly one day having a trading link between London and Shanghai stock exchanges. What role do you envision London playing in the modernization and globalization of the Chinese currency and stock markets?
答：改革开放37年特别是近几年来，中国金融业改革开放进展显著。中国将继续采取多种措施，推进金融业改革开放，使中国金融市场更加适应金融现代化和全球化发展的要求。
A: The reform and opening up of China's financial sector has made remarkable progress since China embarked on the path of reform and opening up 37 years ago. This has been especially obvious in the past several years. China will continue to adopt multiple measures to advance the reform and opening up of its financial sector so that its financial market can better adapt to financial modernization and globalization.
伦敦是世界金融中心之一，是世界经济血液循环的一个重要泵站。加强同伦敦的金融合作，肯定是互利双赢的选项。中英两国金融合作起步早、发展快、潜力大，走在各领域合作前列。近年来，两国签署了双边本币互换协议，中国在伦敦设立人民币清算行，英国成为亚洲以外首个获批人民币合格境外机构投资者初始额度的国家、首个发行人民币主权债券的西方国家、首个将人民币纳入外汇储备的主要发达国家。这是双方合作的一大亮点。
As one of the global financial centers, London is an important pump station in the world economic lifeline, so to speak. Strengthened financial cooperation with London is definitely a win-win choice for both countries. China-UK financial cooperation started early. It has enjoyed rapid growth, has tremendous potential and leads China-UK cooperation in various areas. We have accomplished much in recent years. Our two countries signed the bilateral currency swap agreement. China set up an RMB clearing bank in London. The UK became the first country outside Asia to obtain the RQFII initial investment quota, the first Western country to issue RMB-denominated sovereign bond and the first major developed country to include RMB into its foreign exchange reserves. This is a highlight in our bilateral cooperation.
伦敦早在2012年就正式启动了“人民币业务中心计划”。经过几年发展，伦敦已经成为最具活力和最重要的人民币交易中心和离岸人民币市场之一。2014年，伦敦的人民币外汇交易规模同比增长143%，人民币存款规模达到200亿元，同比增长37%。
Back in 2012, London officially launched the plan of Center of RMB Business. London has since then become one of the most dynamic and most important RMB trading centers and offshore RMB markets. In 2014, RMB trading in London grew by 143 percent year-on-year and its RMB deposits reached 20 billion yuan, a year-on-year increase of 37 percent.
只要条件具备，中国愿意积极考虑加强两国金融市场互联互通。伦敦可以发挥金融领域的独特优势，在中国金融市场现代化和全球化发展进程中发挥积极作用。
When conditions are in place, China is ready to consider strengthening the connectivity of the financial markets of the two countries. London can leverage its unique strengths in the financial field to get actively involved in the modernization and globalization of China' s financial market.
问：中国企业可能参与英格兰西南部核电站建设。中国政府今年早些时候宣布将支持中国企业在诸如高铁和核电等领域拓展海外市场。未来10年，您希望看到中国企业在全球市场发挥什么样的作用?您认为中国企业拓展海外市场会遇到哪些阻力?是否会导致新的贸易摩擦?中国政府采取国家补贴等方式支持中国企业在海外进行拓展，对其他市场主体是否公平?是否符合中国发展市场经济的目标?
3. Chinese companies are expected to take a stake in the nuclear power plant in southwest England. This is in line with plans announced by your government earlier this year to help Chinese firms in areas such as high-speed rail and nuclear power to expand overseas. What role do you hope to see Chinese companies playing in the global markets over the next decade? Do you think that opposition could derail China's participation in such projects overseas? Will such opposition lead to fresh trade frictions? Is such state-subsidized, state-directed expansion of Chinese industry abroad fair to other market players and in line with China's professed desire for a more market-driven economy?
答：中国对外开放不断走向深入，这既包括中国打开大门吸引外资，也包括中国企业走出国门进行投资。这是一国经济发展到一定阶段必然发生的事情，也是企业要发展壮大必然进行的事情。世界各大企业都走这条路。
A: China is intensifying its reform and opening-up drive, which means both opening up its economy further to attract foreign investment and encourage Chinese firms to make overseas investment. This is natural when a country reaches a particular stage of development and when a company grows bigger, and this is what all big companies in the world are doing.
中国企业发展得益于世界经济，应该为世界经济发展作出贡献。中国已经成为世界制造业大国，突出优势是处于全球产业链中游，高铁、核电、汽车等一大批产业和装备处于国际先进水平，性价比好，符合很多国家需求和承接能力。中国愿同包括英国在内的各国开展多种形式的国际产能和装备制造合作，把各自比较优势衔接起来，实现联动发展。欣克利角核电站项目是中英法三方合作的产物，希望三国企业充分发挥各自优势，确保项目顺利实施，造福英国人民。
Having benefited from the world economy, Chinese companies should contribute their share to world economic development. China has grown into a global manufacturing power, with particular strengths at the middle rung of the global industrial chain. Many Chinese industrial sectors and equipment making capacity, including the building of high-speed railway and nuclear power stations as well as automobiles making, are advanced and competitive internationally, and meet the demand and absorbing capacity of many countries. China is ready to pursue cooperation of various forms with the UK and other countries in international production capacity and equipment manufacturing to synergize our respective strengths and promote each other's development. The Hinkley Point is the product of tripartite cooperation among China, the UK and France. I hope that the companies of the three countries will fully leverage their respective strengths to ensure the successful launch of this project and deliver benefits to the British people.
对外投资遇到一些摩擦属于正常的营商范畴。任何企业只要开展经营活动，不论是在国内还是在国外，总会遇到这样那样的问题。在商言商，不能把企业在经营过程中产生的矛盾政治化，不要带着偏见看待中国企业。企业发展当然要竞争，没有人会把市场拱手让给竞争对手。我们希望这种竞争是良性的、符合市场规律的，而不要设置一些非经济、非市场的“弹簧门”、“玻璃门”。同世界上老牌的大公司对比，中国企业走出去还缺乏经验，在适应各国法律制度、技术标准、市场营销、人员管理、当地文化等方面的能力需要不断提高。在激烈的国际竞争中，中国企业会学到很多，会越做越好。
It is normal for a company to encounter various problems when making investment, whether domestically or overseas. When doing business, one should focus on business. Problems that occur in business operations should not be politicized, and Chinese companies should not be viewed with bias. Competition is necessary for a business to grow, and no one will give away a market to its rivals. We hope that such competition is benign and market-based. There should be no swing doors or glass doors which are placed as non-economic or non-market-based barriers. Unlike established multinational companies, Chinese companies still lack experience in making investment overseas. They need to better adapt to local laws and regulations, technological standards, marketing, human resources management rules, local cultures, etc. Chinese companies will learn a lot and emerge successful in fierce international competition.
中国政府支持企业走出去，但强调要坚持以企业为主体，以市场为导向。中国政府的作用是为企业争取和创造良好的政治环境和公平的制度框架。这是各国政府都会做的事，而且西方国家做得比我们好。即便在市场经济条件下，各国对企业发展都会有形式多样的支持措施，不能简单把这些都看成是国家补贴。中国和西方国家体制不同，由于历史原因，中国企业往往承担了大量社会职能，难以用一种简单的数学公式来计算。
The Chinese government supports Chinese companies in going global. But we believe that this process should be market-oriented with companies being the main driver. The role of the Chinese government is to secure and create a favorable political environment and a fair legal framework for Chinese companies. This is what all governments are doing, and I think the Western countries are doing better than us. Even under market conditions, countries support the growth of their companies in various ways, and such measures should not be all labelled as government subsidy. China's system is different from that of Western countries. Due to historical reasons, Chinese companies perform many social functions, which are hard to measure with a simple arithmetic formula.
未来10年，中国对外投资将持续增长，有关机构测算将超过1.25万亿美元，这将为中英合作提供更多宝贵机遇。两国企业还可以加强在发展中国家的三方合作，把全球价值链的上、中、下游结合起来，共享发展机遇。
In the coming decade, China's overseas investment will continue to grow and is forecast to reach 1.25 trillion U.S. dollars. This will provide more opportunities for China-UK cooperation. The Chinese and British companies may also engage in tripartite cooperation in developing countries to integrate the upper stream, middle stream and lower stream of the global value chain and share development opportunities.
问：英国是首个申请加入亚洲基础设施投资银行的欧洲国家。中国承诺亚洲基础设施投资银行将透明运作，并实施高标准管理。中国将如何确保亚洲基础设施投资银行运作真正做到透明并实现世界一流管理?
4. Britain was the first European country to sign up for membership of the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). China has promised that the new bank will be transparent and have high governance standards. How will China ensure that the AIIB really will be transparent and have world-class governance?
答：中国提出筹建亚洲基础设施投资银行，目的是推动亚洲地区基础设施建设和互联互通，深化区域合作。
A: China's initiative to establish the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank aims to promote infrastructure development and connectivity in Asia and boost regional cooperation.
亚投行是一个国际性的金融机构，其规章制度和运作要由各成员国协商决定，并不是中国一家说了就算的。中国赞成亚投行充分借鉴现有多边开发银行的经验和做法，在治理结构、业务政策、人力资源管理等方面坚持国际性、规范性、高标准，确保专业运营、高效运作、透明廉洁。在《亚洲基础设施投资银行协定》谈判过程中，57个意向创始成员国秉承开放、包容、专业、透明的原则，达成了高质量的协定文本，53个意向创始成员国已经签署了协定。
The AIIB is an international financial institution whose rules of operation are decided by its members through consultation, not by China alone. We agree that the AIIB should fully draw on the experience and practices of other multilateral development banks, observe high international standards in terms of governance structure, operation guidelines, and human resources management, and ensure its professional and efficient operation as well as transparency and integrity. During the negotiation over the AIIB agreement, 57 prospective founding members acted on the principle of openness, inclusion, professionalism and transparency, and concluded a high-quality agreement text. A total of 53 prospective founding members have signed the agreement.
据我了解，这个协定在很多方面借鉴了现有多边开发银行的做法，同时还有所突破和创新。比如，在治理结构上，亚投行按照多边开发银行的通行做法，设立理事会、董事会、管理层三层管理架构，还根据透明、公开、独立、问责的原则建立了银行监督机制。协定中明确写入了“公开、透明、择优”的遴选管理层原则，是一项区别于现有主要多边开发银行章程的创新之举。又比如，亚投行项目采购面向全球所有国家，不局限于成员国，这同其他一些区域性多边开发银行不同。
I know that this agreement has drawn on the practices of existing multilateral development banks in many ways. It has also made some breakthroughs and explored new ways of operation. For example, in terms of governance structure, AIIB has, with reference to the common practice of multilateral development banks, set up a three-tiered structure, consisting of a board of governors, a board of directors and a management team. It has also put in place an oversight mechanism in line with the principle of transparency, openness, independence and accountability. It is specified in the agreement that the management team will be selected through an open, transparent and merit-based process. This is a new principle not included in the constitution of existing major multilateral development banks. Another example is that the AIIB places no restriction on the procurement of goods and services from any country, and again this is not the case in the other regional multilateral development banks.
目前，各意向创始成员国正按照协定的规定和精神协商制定具体的业务政策和规章。亚投行同现有多边开发银行是合作互补关系，未来将在知识共享、能力建设、联合融资等方面积极开展合作。
The AIIB prospective founding members are working on the specific operation guidelines in accordance with the agreement. The relationship between the AIIB and existing multilateral development banks is a cooperative and complementary one. The AIIB will engage in cooperation with them in terms of sharing expertise, capacity building and joint financing.
中国积极评价并欢迎英国加入亚投行，愿同包括英方在内的各意向创始成员国一道，将亚投行打造成专业、高效的基础设施投融资平台，为亚洲和全球发展事业作出积极贡献。
China commends and welcomes the UK joining into the AIIB. We are ready to work with the UK and all other prospective founding members to build the AIIB into a professional and efficient infrastructure financing platform to contribute to the development of Asia and beyond.
问：作为国际社会一员，中国无论是帮助推进南苏丹和平进程，还是在也门内战中撤离包括英国人在内的外国人员，都发挥着越来越积极的作用。随着中国经济实力和世界影响力持续增长，中国将更多需要在全球范围内寻求保护自身权益。您如何看待未来10年中国在全球事务中的角色变化?中国是否将在调解冲突方面发挥更大作用?中国是否会有朝一日取代美国，成为世界警察，在世界各地建立军事基地以保护自己的利益?
5. China is playing an increasingly active role as a member of the international community, whether by helping bring peace to South Sudan or evacuating foreigners, including Britons, from the civil war in Yemen. As China's economic strength and world influence continue to grow, it needs to make more efforts to protect its rights and interests across the world. How do you see China's role in global affairs changing in the coming decade? Will it play a greater role in mediating conflicts? Will China one day replace the United Statesas the world's policeman and protect its interests by establishing military bases around the world?
答：中国过去是、现在是、将来也必将是世界和平的维护者、共同发展的促进者、国际合作的推动者。随着综合国力不断提升，中国将更加积极地参与国际和地区事务。
A: China was, is and will continue to be a force for world peace, common development and international cooperation. With the increase of its overall strength, China will be able to play a more active role in international and regional affairs.
在今年9月举行的联合国成立70周年系列峰会上，我代表中国政府宣布，设立“南南合作援助基金”，首期提供20亿美元；设立为期10年、总额10亿美元的中国-联合国和平与发展基金；加入新的联合国维和能力待命机制，为此率先组建常备成建制维和警队，并建设8000人规模的维和待命部队。此外，中国还将在未来5年内，向非盟提供总额为1亿美元的无偿军事援助，以支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设。
At the summits commemorating the 70th anniversary of the UN this September, I announced on behalf the Chinese government a series of initiatives, which include: the establishment of an assistance fund for South-South cooperation with an initial pledge of 2 billion U.S. dollars; a ten-year, 1-billion-U.S. dollar China-UN peace and development fund; China joining the newly-established UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad and a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops; the provision of 100 million U.S. dollars in military aid to the African Union in the coming five years to support the building of African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
中国为世界和平与发展作出更多努力，不是想成为所谓的“世界警察”，更不是要取代谁。我们历来主张，各国的事情要由各国人民自己决定，世界上的事情要由世界各国人民商量决定。中国坚持联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，坚持不干涉别国内政，坚持以和平方式解决国际和地区热点问题。中国已经多次宣布，中国奉行防御性的国防政策，中国永远不称霸、永远不搞扩张、永远不会把自己的意志强加于人。
China has been stepping up efforts for world peace and development not because it wants to become a "world cop", even less to take anyone' s place. We are always of the view that a country's affairs should be decided by its own people and the world's affairs should be managed through consultation among the peoples of all countries. China upholds the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. It pursues common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. China follows the principle of non-interference in other country's internal affairs and believes that international and regional hot spots should be resolved by peaceful means. China has declared many times that it pursues adefence policy defensive in nature and will never seek hegemony, engage in expansion or impose its own will on others.
问：中国是世界上最大的温室气体排放国，且已承诺使二氧化碳排放到2030年左右达到峰值，并将降低碳强度——使得每单位经济产出的排放量在2005年的水平上降低60%至65%。作为一个发展中国家，中国一直坚持发达国家应为减少二氧化碳排放承担大部分责任。中国是否会为确保年底巴黎气候变化大会达成一致而改变自己的谈判立场或作出进一步妥协?
6. China, the world's biggest greenhouse gas emitter, has pledged to bring its emissions to a peak by "around 2030" and has also said it would cut carbon intensity - the amount emitted per unit of economic output - by 60 to 65 percent below the 2005 level. As a developing country, China has stuck firmly to the principle that industrialized nations should bear most of the burden when it comes to cutting carbon emissions. Is China prepared to change any of its negotiating positions or offer further compromises in order to make sure that a new global climate change deal is secured in Paris later this year?
答：气候变化是全球性挑战，任何一国都无法置身事外。发达国家和发展中国家对造成气候变化的历史责任不同，发展需求和能力也存在差异。就像一场赛车一样，有的车已经跑了很远，有的车刚刚出发，这个时候用统一尺度来限制车速是不适当的，也是不公平的。发达国家在应对气候变化方面多作表率，符合《联合国气候变化框架公约》所确立的共同但有区别的责任、公平、各自能力等重要原则，也是广大发展中国家的共同心愿。
A: Climate change is a global challenge at which no country can stand on their own. Developed and developing countries have different historical responsibilities for climate change, and different development needs and capabilities. Just like in a car race: it would be neither reasonable nor fair to apply the same speed requirements to cars which have run far ahead and those which have only just left the starting point. Developed countries should do more and lead the way in addressing climate change. This is in keeping with the important principles laid down in the UNFCCC, such as "common but differentiated responsibilities", equity and respective capabilities. This is also the hope of all developing countries.
坚持共同但有区别的责任等原则，不是说发展中国家就不要为全球应对气候变化作出贡献了，而是说要符合发展中国家能力和要求。中国已经成为世界节能和利用新能源、可再生能源第一大国。2014年，中国单位国内生产总值能耗和二氧化碳排放分别比2005年下降29.9%和33.8%。中国向联合国提交了国家自主贡献，这既是着眼于促进全球气候治理，也是中国发展的内在要求，是为实现公约目标所能作出的最大努力。中国宣布建立规模为200亿元人民币的气候变化南南合作基金，用以支持其他发展中国家。
Having said that, the principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities" does not exempt developing countries from contributing their share to global response to climate change. It is only that such contribution should be in line with their capabilities and needs. China is now the world's biggest country in energy conservation and utilization of new and renewable energy. In 2014, China's per unit GDP energy consumption and CO2 emission were cut by 29.9 percent and 33.8 percent respectively from the 2005 level. China's submission to the UN of its nationally intended contributions is aimed at facilitating global climate governance, and also for the sake of China's own development. It represents China's very best effort to help achieve the goals set in the UNFCCC. China has announced the setting up of an 20-billion-RMB yuan South-South cooperation fund on climate change to help other developing countries.
今年年底召开的巴黎大会将对2020年后国际应对气候变化机制作出安排，在全球应对气候变化多边进程中具有重要意义。谈判需要各方展现灵活，但《联合国气候变化框架公约》的基本原则应该得到遵循。各方要最大程度展示诚意，聚同化异，相向而行。中国愿发挥建设性作用，推动巴黎大会如期达成全面、均衡、有力度的协议。
The Paris Conference coming up at the end of this year is a significant milestone in the multilateral process on climate change, as it will set up post-2020 international regimes to tackle this challenge. Progress in negotiations requires flexibility of all parties, yet the basic principles of the UNFCCC need to be observed. Parties should demonstrate sincerity as much as they can, build up consensus and work toward the same goal. China is ready to play a constructive role and work for the timely conclusion of a comprehensive, balanced and strong agreement at the Paris conference.
问：中国处理南海领土主权问题的态度越来越坚定，这让许多邻国感到担忧。中国表示不追求霸权，将始终不渝坚持走和平发展道路。您如何看待许多邻国对此心怀疑虑?对中国在南海的活动可能加剧本地区安全局势恶化的指责，您如何回应?中国当前在南海活动的最终目的是什么?
7. China is being increasingly assertive in pushing its territorial claims in the South China Sea, which has worried many of its neighbors. China also says it will not pursue hegemony and will unswervingly stick to the path of peaceful development. Do you understand why so many of China's neighbors doubt these claims? How do you respond to accusations that China's activities in the South China Sea could be worsening the security situation in the region? What is China's ultimate aim with its current activities in the South China Sea?
答：走和平发展道路符合中国根本利益，也符合地区国家和人民共同期待。中国的这个战略选择没有变，也不会变。长期以来，中国同邻国积极开展互利合作，给地区国家和人民带来了实实在在的利益。新形势下，中国将努力把中国发展惠及周边国家和人民，坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴的周边外交方针，坚持睦邻、安邻、富邻的周边外交政策，落实体现亲诚惠容的周边外交理念。
A: To follow the path of peaceful development serves China's fundamental interests, and is also what regional countries and peoples expect from us. It is a strategic choice made by China that has not changed and will not change. For many years, China's active efforts for win-win cooperation with its neighbors have brought real benefits to countries and peoples in the region. Under the new circumstances, China will strive to deliver more benefits of its development to neighboring countries and peoples. China will continue to pursue friendship and partnership with its neighbors, build a harmonious, secure and prosperous neighborhood and follow through on its policy of amity, sincerity, mutual-benefit and inclusiveness towards its neighbors.
南海诸岛自古以来就是中国领土，这是老祖宗留下的。任何人要侵犯中国的主权和相关权益，中国人民都不会答应。中国在南海采取的有关行动，是维护自身领土主权的正当反应。对本国领土范围外的土地提出主权要求，那是扩张主义。中国从未那么做过，不应当受到怀疑和指责。
The islands and reefs in the South China Sea are Chinese territory since ancient times. They are left to us by our ancestors. The Chinese people will not allow anyone to infringe on China's sovereignty and related rights and interests in the South China Sea. The actions China has taken in the South China Sea are legitimate reactions to safeguard its territorial sovereignty. Expansionism refers to laying claims to land outside one's own territory. China has never done anything like that, so such doubts or accusations are unwarranted.
在各方共同努力下，南海形势总体是稳定的。南海是中国对外经济往来的重要通道。中国比任何国家都需要南海和平、安全、稳定。中国不愿看到南海生乱，更不会主动制造混乱。当前，中国正积极努力同东盟国家在全面有效落实《南海各方行为宣言》的框架下，积极推进“南海行为准则”的磋商。中国将继续同南海周边邻国一道，通过机制对话管控争议，通过谈判协商和平解决争议，积极探索通过合作和共同开发实现互利共赢，维护各国依据国际法享有的南海航行和飞越自由，努力将南海建设成和平、友好、合作之海。有关方面也应尊重地区国家维护南海和平稳定的努力。
With the joint efforts of all parties, the situation in the South China Sea has on the whole been stable. The South China Sea provides important waterways for China's international commercial exchanges. China needs peace, security and stability in the South China Sea more than any other country. China would not want any turbulence there, still less would it be the party to stir up chaos. It is working hard to take forward consultations on a code of conduct in the South China Sea within the framework of fully and effectively implementing the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea. China will continue to work with its neighbors in the South China Sea to manage disputes through institutionalized dialogue, peacefully resolve disputes through negotiation and consultation, actively explore win-win results through cooperation and joint development, and safeguard the freedom of navigation and overflight enjoyed by countries in accordance with international law. We will together endeavor to make the South China Sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation. And the efforts of countries in the region to maintain peace and stability there deserve more respect.
问：中国要求包括英国在内的国际社会协助遣返逃往海外的贪腐嫌疑人。一些国家抱怨中国不愿提供通过司法程序办理驱逐令所需要的证据。在推动遣返嫌疑人问题上，中国将如何改进同其他国家的合作?
8. China has asked for international help from countries including Britain to return corruption suspects who have fled overseas. Some of these countries have complained that China is reluctant to hand over the evidence needed for them to be able to process deportation orders in court. How will China improve its cooperation with foreign countries to get these suspects back?
答：中国司法机关在进行反腐败国际合作时，对具体案件都应该提供确凿证据。中国是一个法治国家，无论是在国内惩治腐败，还是开展反腐败国际合作，都依法办事，坚持以事实为依据、以法律为准绳。
A: China's judicial departments would readily provide solid evidence on specific cases in international anti-corruption cooperation. China is a country with rule of law. It acts according to law and on the basis of facts both in fighting corruption within the country and carrying out international anti-corruption cooperation.
对任何国家来说，腐败都是民众最痛恨的现象。中国开展这方面的国际合作，是要将逃往境外的腐败犯罪嫌疑人缉捕归案，绳之以法。中英两国在共同打击腐败犯罪方面保持着良好合作。双方已经缔结刑事司法协助条约，为合作打击腐败犯罪奠定了法律基础。
In any country, corruption is most detested by the people. International cooperation in this area is aimed at bringing criminal suspects who have committed acts of corruption and absconded overseas back to China to face justice. China and the UK have maintained sound cooperation in jointly fighting corruption and concluded the treaty for mutual legal assistance in criminal matters, which has laid the legal foundation for jointly fighting corruption.
任何国家和地区都不应成为腐败分子和腐败资金的“避风港”，不应成为他们的“避罪天堂”。中国人民最不能理解的是，一些罪行确凿的腐败犯罪分子可以在一些国家逍遥法外，以各种借口逃避法律惩处。由于各国在法律制度等方面存在差异，通过国际合作打击腐败犯罪需要解决一些法律技术性问题。这需要有关各方共同探讨解决方案，特别是要加强反腐败机构和执法机构在个案调查和信息交流等方面合作。相信只要有打击腐败的政治意愿，反腐败国际合作一定能够取得更多成果。
In today's world, no country or place should provide shelter or even safe haven for corrupt elements and their proceeds of crime. What baffles the Chinese people the most is that some corrupt elements for whose crimes there are solid evidence should be able to stay at large in some countries and escape the punishment of the law by citing all kinds of excuses. Due to differences in legal systems between countries, some technical legal matters need to be worked through in international cooperation against corruption. This requires various parties to explore solutions together. In particular, anti-corruption and law enforcement agencies need to strengthen cooperation in investigation and information sharing on individual cases. I am convinced that as long as we have the political will to fight corruption, international cooperation in this field will surely yield more results.
问：中国经济规模和全球影响越来越大。世界各国决策者都越来越需要了解中国当前经济形势。中国政府今年的经济增长目标为7%左右。然而过去几个月里，中国经济形势似乎在恶化。许多投资者和经济学家认为这个目标不太可能实现，这引发了全球金融和商品市场的巨大担忧。您觉得7%的目标能实现吗?中国政府下一步准备采取什么措施来防止经济增速过缓?如何保持中国金融市场稳定运行?
9. China's economy and its global impact are growing bigger and bigger. Policy-makers around the world all need to know about China's economic situation more than ever before. Your government has set a target of growing the economy by around 7 percent this year. However, the economic situation appears to have deteriorated in the last several months, and many investors and economists now see this target as highly unlikely to be reached, creating great concern in global financial and commodity markets. Do you expect to meet this target? What further measures do you stand ready to take in order to keep growth from slowing too much? How to maintain stability of China's financial market?
答：今年上半年中国经济增长7%，符合全年增长预期目标，也是全球主要经济体中增长最快的。一个国家经济增长，有快有慢是正常的，不能说只能加速、不能减速，这不符合经济规律。上半年中国经济增长7%，是在经济总量10万多亿美元的基础上实现的，相当于一个中等国家全年的国内生产总值，带来的增量比前几年两位数增长还要多。
A: The Chinese economy grew by 7 percent in the first half of this year, which is consistent with the growth target of the whole year and is the fastest growth rate among major economies around the world. It is normal that an economy may grow at different speeds in different periods. It would be against the law of economics to aim for ever higher growth without any slowing down. The 7 percent growth in the first half of this year was achieved on the basis of an economy of over 10 trillion U.S. dollars. The increment is already equivalent to the annual GDP of a medium-sized country and still exceeds what was generated by double-digit growth several years ago.
中国同国际市场密切关联，全球经济情况总体偏弱，中国不可能独善其身。中国经济发展有让我们担忧的问题，我们正在抓紧加以解决。我们也担忧世界经济增长乏力，这对各国特别是发展中国家发展不利。
As an economy closely linked to international markets, China cannot stay immune to the lackluster performance of the global economy. We do have concerns about the Chinese economy, and we are working hard to address them. We also worry about the sluggish world economy, which affects all countries, especially developing ones.
历史学家汤因比博士认为，“挑战-应战”是人类文明发展的重要动因。中国经济发展进入新常态，正经历新旧动能转化的阵痛，但中国经济稳定发展的基本面没有改变。中国新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化深入推进，国内市场需求强劲，经济发展具有巨大潜力、韧性、回旋余地，结构性改革正在深化，中国经济的前景十分光明。
Historian Dr. Arnold Toynbee believes that "challenge and response" is an important factor underpinning the development of human civilization. China's economic development is adjusting to the new normal and experiencing growing pains of shifting from old drivers of growth to new ones. Yet the fundamentals of a steadily growing economy have remained unchanged. The new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization that is in full swing has generated strong domestic demand and great potential for future growth. It has also made the economy more resilient and adaptable. All this, coupled with deepening structural reforms, means that China will have very promising economic prospects.
中国正在统筹稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险，加强和创新宏观调控，提高经济发展质量和效益，解决经济发展中存在的不平衡、不协调、不可持续问题，更加注重创新驱动，更加倚重消费拉动。中国利用外商投资政策不会变，我们会健全商业法治，保护知识产权，促进公平竞争。中国将推进“一带一路”建设，积极开展国际产能合作，拉动中国同世界经济共同增长。
We are making coordinated efforts to promote steady growth, continued reform, structural adjustments, and higher living standards, and forestall economic risks. We will enhance macro regulation in creative ways to improve the quality and efficiency of economic development and address the lack of balance, coordination and sustainability in the economy. We will put more emphasis on innovation and consumption-driven growth. The policy on utilizing foreign investment remains unchanged. We will improve the rule of law in the commercial field, protect intellectual property rights, and promote fair competition. We will continue to promote the development of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road and carry out international cooperation on production capacity. Both the Chinese economy and the world economy stand to benefit in this process.
面对近期国际国内金融市场形势变化，我们陆续出台降准降息、完善人民币汇率形成机制等一系列举措。目前，市场风险得到相当程度释放，内在稳定性增强。下一步，中国将按照市场化、法治化方向稳步推进金融改革，培育公开透明和长期稳定健康发展的资本市场，完善风险管理，稳定市场预期，放宽民间资本进入金融领域的限制，更好支持实体经济发展。
In the face of changes in the domestic and international financial markets, we have taken a number of steps including lowering the required reserve ratio and interest rates and improving the RMB exchange rate regime. These measures have helped to largely defuse risks and restore stability in the markets. Going forward, we will deepen market-oriented financial reforms according to law to cultivate an open and transparent capital market that enjoys long-term, stable and sound development. We will improve risk management, stabilize market expectations and make it easier for private capital to operate in the financial sector to better support the real economy.
问：您曾经说，希望有一天中国能够举办足球世界杯，赢得世界杯。您不仅关心这项运动，而且今年早些时候还宣布了中国足球重大改革方案。英国是现代足球发源地。为提高中国足球水平，促进中国足球产业像英国一样取得成功，中国是否能从英国学习和借鉴些什么?您对中国足球的最大期待是什么?
10. You have said that you hope one day China will be able to host the World Cup, and that one day China could win it. You care about the sport enough that you announced big reform plans for Chinese football earlier this year. Britain is the birthplace of modern football. Is there anything China can learn from Britain in raising the level of Chinese football, and making the Chinese football industry as successful as Britain's? What is your biggest hope for Chinese football?
答：足球是世界第一运动，拥有世界上最多的球迷，在中国就有上亿球迷。我对中国足球的最大期待，就是中国足球能跻身世界强队，使足球运动为增强人民体质、激励人们顽强奋斗精神发挥重要作用。中国将深化足球体制改革，以发展青少年足球、改革足球职业体制、加强国际合作、壮大足球产业等目标为抓手，走出一条既符合足球发展规律又适合中国实际的足球发展路子。
A: Football is the most popular sport in the world and there are over 100 million football fans in China alone. My greatest expectation on Chinese football is for the Chinese team to be one of the best in the world and for football to play an important role in making people stronger in body and mind. We will find a new way forward for the sport to flourish in China that is both consistent with the general pattern of football development and fits well with Chinese conditions. We will pursue the goals of strengthening football training for the youth, reforming the professional football system, enhancing international cooperation and boosting the football industry.
英国有深厚的足球文化底蕴和丰富的足球发展经验，英超联赛是影响最大、经营最成功的职业联赛之一。近年来，中英两国在足球领域开展了良好交流合作。2012年，中英校园足球项目启动，英国为中国基层足球教练员提供培训。2013年，两国签署了职业联赛合作意向书，英国球星贝克汉姆成为“中国青少年足球发展及中超联赛推广大使”。上个月，两国共同签署了关于青少年足球“明日之星”计划的谅解备忘录。未来5年，中国将建成2万所足球特色学校，中英两国在足球人才培养、教练和裁判员培训等领域合作潜力巨大。
The UK has a long and proud history of football and a wealth of experience in this sport. The Premier League is one of the most influential and successful professional football leagues in the world. China and the UK have had good cooperation on football in recent years. In 2012, a cooperation program was launched to promote football in schools and the UK started to train Chinese football coaches at the grassroots level. In 2013, the Premier League and the Chinese Super League signed a letter of intent on cooperation, and David Beckham was named "ambassador for the youth football program in China and the Chinese Super League" . Last month, the two countries signed an MOU to produce future stars in football. In the next five years, football training will be introduced to 20,000 Chinese schools, which means huge potential of cooperation between China and the UK in the training of players, coaches and referees.
我相信，中国足球一定会得到更大发展，也将为世界足球运动作出自己的贡献。
I am confident that Chinese football will do better and make its own contribution to world football.

