118. 习近平在巴基斯坦媒体发表署名文章《中巴人民友谊万岁》
中巴人民友谊万岁
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Pak-China Dosti Zindabad
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
在巴基斯坦，有这样一句乌尔都语诗歌：“朋友的美好形象，就在我心的明镜之中，稍一低头，就能看见。”在我心目中，巴基斯坦就是这样一位好朋友。我年轻时就经常听说关于巴基斯坦和中巴友好的动人故事，如巴基斯坦人民用勤劳的双手建设着自己美丽的家园，巴基斯坦为中国提供同世界联系的空中走廊，支持中国恢复联合国合法席位，等等。这些故事给我留下深刻印象。我期待着即将对巴基斯坦进行国事访问。这是我首次访问巴基斯坦，但我感觉就像到自己兄弟家中探访一样。
"My friend's lovely image dwells in the mirror of my heart; I tilt my head slightly, and here it comes into my sight." Just as this line from an Urdu poem describes, Pakistan is such a good friend in my heart. When I was young, I heard many touching stories about Pakistan and the friendship between our two countries. To name just a few, I learned that the Pakistani people were working hard to build their beautiful country, and that Pakistan opened an air corridor for China to reach out to the world and supported China in restoring its lawful seat in the United Nations. The stories have left me with a deep impression. I look forward to my upcoming state visit to Pakistan. This will be my first trip to Pakistan, but I feel as if I am going to visit the home of my own brother.
长期以来，在两国历代领导人和各界人士精心培育下，中巴友谊像一棵茁壮成长的大树，根深叶茂。无论国际和地区形势及两国国内情况如何变化，中巴关系一直健康稳定发展，两国在涉及彼此核心利益问题上始终相互尊重、相互理解、相互支持。在巴基斯坦，人们用“比山高、比海深、比蜜甜”这样诗歌般的语言来赞颂中巴友谊。在中国，人们都把巴基斯坦称作“真诚可靠的朋友”。中巴友谊正日益深深植根于两国人民心中。
Over the years, thanks to the nurturing of generations of leaders and people from all sectors of both countries, China-Pakistan friendship has flourished like a tree growing tall and strong. No matter how the circumstances in our two countries, the region and the world change, our bilateral relations have enjoyed sound and steady growth. We have always respected, understood and supported each other on issues concerning our respective core interests. In Pakistan, our relationship is poetically hailed as a friendship "higher than mountains, deeper than oceans and sweeter than honey." In China, Pakistan is known as a sincere and reliable friend. Obviously, China-Pakistan friendship is deeply felt in the hearts of our two peoples.
长期以来，中巴两国在各领域开展了全方位互利合作，结出了累累硕果，给两国人民带来实实在在的利益。当前，两国正在稳步推进中巴经济走廊建设，致力于打造中巴命运共同体。中巴合作的出发点和立足点是深化两国利益融合，携手共谋发展，为两国人民带来更多福祉，绘制更加美好的发展蓝图。	
Over a long period of time, China and Pakistan have conducted all-round, mutually beneficial and fruitful cooperation in various fields, bringing tangible benefits to the people of both countries. At present, the two sides are working together to steadily advance the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. Committed to building a China-Pakistan community of common destiny, we cooperate to expand our converging interests and strive for common development. Our aim is to deliver even more benefits to our peoples and realize brighter development prospects.
巴基斯坦政府和人民致力于发展经济、改善民生，同时坚决打击恐怖主义和极端主义，维护国家安全和社会稳定，取得了显著成效。作为好朋友、好兄弟，中方为巴方取得的每一点进步、每一项成就感到由衷高兴。我相信，只要巴基斯坦人民齐心协力、团结奋进，就一定能够找到符合自身国情的发展道路，在国家建设事业中取得更大成就，早日实现成为“亚洲之虎”的梦想。	
The government and people of Pakistan are pursuing economic development and the improvement of people's livelihood. At the same time, Pakistan is resolutely fighting terrorism and extremism. As a result, good progress has been made in national security and social stability. As Pakistan's good friend and brother, China is truly happy for every progress and achievement of Pakistan. I believe that as long as the Pakistani people work together in unity, Pakistan will surely embark on a development path suited to its national conditions, achieve even greater success in national development and realize its dream of becoming an "Asian tiger" at an early date.
中国人民正在努力实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。中国梦是和平、发展、合作、共赢的梦，我们追求中国人民的福祉，也追求各国人民共同的福祉。中国愿同包括巴基斯坦在内的南亚各国和睦相处，愿为南亚发展添砖加瓦。中国提出丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路倡议，就是要通过加强沿线国家互联互通，实现共同发展。	
The Chinese people are working toward the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. It is a dream about peace, development and win-win cooperation. What we pursue is not just the interests of the Chinese people, but also the common interests of the world people. China wishes to live in harmony with Pakistan and other countries in South Asia and contribute its share to the development of this region. The aim of China's initiative of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is to promote common development by enhancing connectivity among countries along these routes. We hope that this initiative will enable us to work together with South Asian countries to fulfill our common dream of rapid development.
我这次对巴基斯坦进行国事访问，是我今年首次出访的第一站。访问期间，我将会见侯赛因总统、谢里夫总理等巴基斯坦领导人，广泛接触各界人士，同他们就两国关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见。我期待着通过这次访问，同巴基斯坦领导人一道谋划两国合作总体框架，推动中巴经济走廊建设和其他各领域务实合作取得实质性进展，使中巴关系在更高水平上向前发展。	
Pakistan is the first stop of my first overseas visit this year. During my visit, I will meet with President Mamnoon Hussain, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and other Pakistani leaders as well as people from various sectors for in-depth exchange of views on bilateral relations and issues of shared interest. I look forward to working with Pakistani leaders during the visit to explore the general framework for bilateral cooperation, make substantive progress in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and practical cooperation in other fields and push for the furtherance of bilateral ties at a higher level.
——我们要把两国发展战略更紧密结合起来，共圆人民梦想。中巴两国肩负着发展经济和改善民生的历史重任。我们要加强战略协调，深化务实合作，携手共谋发展，将中巴命运共同体打造成为中国同周边国家构建命运共同体的典范。	
-- China and Pakistan need to align development strategies more closely to realize the dreams of our peoples. Both our countries face the important task of economic development and improvement of people's livelihood. We need to enhance strategic coordination, deepen practical cooperation and work together for common development. We will build the China-Pakistan community of common destiny and set a fine example for such efforts by China and its neighbouring countries.
——我们要把两国经贸战略更紧密对接起来，深化经济融合。中巴经济走廊位于丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路交汇处，是“一带一路”倡议的重大项目。双方要以中巴经济走廊建设为中心，瓜达尔港、能源、基础设施建设、产业合作为四大重点，形成“1+4”合作布局，带动巴基斯坦各地区发展，让巴基斯坦广大民众得到实惠。	
-- China and Pakistan need to align economic and trade strategies more closely to deepen economic interdependence. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is located in where the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road meet. It is, therefore, a major project of the "Belt and Road" initiative. We need to form a "1+4" cooperation structure with the Economic Corridor at the centre and the Gwadar Port, energy, infrastructure and industrial cooperation being the four key areas to drive development across Pakistan and deliver tangible benefits to its people.
——我们要把两国安全关切更紧密结合起来，加强安全合作。中巴两国安全利益息息相关。安全合作和经济合作相辅相成，相互促进，两个轮子要一起转。我们要深化防务领域合作，加强在地区热点问题上的协调和配合。	
-- China and Pakistan need to align security concerns more closely to strengthen security cooperation. The security interests of China and Pakistan are closely related. Our cooperation in the security and economic fields reinforce each other, and they must be advanced simultaneously. We need to deepen defence cooperation and enhance coordination and collaboration on regional hotspot issues.
——我们要把两国人文交流更紧密联通起来，推动文明对话。两国应该把良好政治关系转化为人文交流的动力，打造不同文明交流互鉴、友好合作的样板。今年是中巴友好交流年，双方要精心组织、密切配合，办好系列庆祝活动。双方要扩大人员往来、语言培训、青年交流、地方友城、传媒和智库合作，让中巴友好扎根基层，让两国人民的心灵更加贴近。	
-- China and Pakistan need to intensify people-to-people and cultural exchanges to promote inter-civilization dialogue. On the basis of our excellent political ties, we should build a momentum of people-to-people exchanges and set a good example of mutual learning and friendly cooperation between different civilizations. This year is the China-Pakistan Year of Friendly Exchanges. The two sides should work closely together to ensure the success of the celebration activities. We need to increase mutual visits, language training, youth exchange and cooperation between sister cities, media and think-tanks so that China-Pakistan friendship will have strong popular support, and the hearts of our peoples will be brought even closer.
——我们要把两国外交战略更紧密协调起来，建设和谐周边。中巴两国在重大国际和地区问题上拥有相同或相似立场，要保持密切沟通和协调，维护两国共同利益，共同营造和平稳定的周边环境。	
-- China and Pakistan need to coordinate diplomatic strategies more closely to build a harmonious neighbourhood. Our two countries have common or similar positions on major international and regional issues. It is important that we maintain close communication and coordination to protect our common interests and foster a peaceful and stable neighbouring environment.
让我们携手并肩，共同努力，开创中巴关系更加美好的未来！
Let us stand shoulder to shoulder and work hand-in-hand to open up an even brighter future of China-Pakistan relations.
中巴人民友谊万岁！
China-Pak dosti zindabad! (Long live China-Pakistan friendship!)
