39. 习近平在菲律宾媒体发表署名文章
共同开辟中菲关系新未来
Open up a New Future Together for China-Philippine Relations
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
应菲律宾共和国总统杜特尔特邀请，我即将对菲律宾进行国事访问。菲律宾风景秀美，民风淳朴，国家发展日新月异，我对这次访问充满期待。在这里，我谨向菲律宾人民致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！
I will soon pay a state visit to the Republic of the Philippines at the kind invitation of President Rodrigo Duterte. I am full of expectations as I am about to set foot on this beautiful land, an ever-growing nation and home to an honest and friendly people. I wish to convey my cordial greetings and best wishes to the people of the Philippines. 
中菲隔海相望、一衣带水，早在1000多年前就已“舟舶相继，商使交属”。600多年前，中国航海家郑和七次远航，多次到访马尼拉海湾及维萨亚、苏禄等地，传播友谊和合作。苏禄国王带着菲律宾人民的美好祝愿踏上通往中国的友谊之路，留下脍炙人口的佳话。中国东南沿海许多居民漂洋过海来到菲律宾，同当地人民和睦相处。菲律宾国父、民族英雄黎刹的祖先就来自中国福建省晋江市。新中国的开国名将叶飞出生于菲律宾奎松省。他们都是两国人民共同的骄傲。
China and the Philippines are neighbors facing each other across the sea. The exchange of ships and merchants between our two countries began more than a thousand years ago. Over 600 years ago, Chinese navigator Zheng He made multiple visits to the Manila Bay, Visayas and Sulu on his seven overseas voyages seeking friendship and cooperation. The King of Sulu also made a goodwill visit to China, bringing with him good wishes to the Chinese people and leaving behind touching stories of China-Philippine friendship. Many born on the southeast coast of China sailed across the sea to settle down in the Philippines and have since lived in harmony with the local community. The ancestors of Jose Rizal, national hero and founding father of the Philippines, came from Jinjiang of China's Fujian Province. The famed Chinese General Ye Fei, who fought for the founding of New China, was born in Quezon of the Philippines. For both our peoples, these are proud names to remember. 
杜特尔特总统上任后，中菲双方重回通过对话协商妥善处理南海问题，两国关系经历风雨后，又见彩虹。短短两年多，中国已成为菲律宾最大贸易伙伴、第一大出口市场、第一大进口来源国、第二大游客来源国。中菲民间投资热情高涨，文化团组往来频密，越来越多菲律宾水果摆上了中国百姓餐桌，越来越多菲律宾名胜列入中国游客行程单。中国坚定支持菲律宾禁毒和反恐努力，支持马拉维战后重建，为菲律宾维护国内和平贡献力量。两国人民在灾害面前守望相助，谱写了一曲又一曲中菲友好赞歌。
Since President Duterte took office, China and the Philippines have reengaged in dialogue and consultation for the proper handling of the South China Sea issue. Our relations have now seen a rainbow after the rain. In just a little more than two years, China has become the Philippines' largest trading partner, largest export market and largest source of imports, and the second largest source of tourists. There has been a surge of interest for private investment in each other's countries, and interactions between our cultural groups have been frequent. More and more Philippine fruits are coming to the dining table in Chinese households, and a growing number of Philippine scenic spots are being included in the itinerary of Chinese tourists. China firmly supports the Philippines' fight against drugs and terrorism and its post-conflict reconstruction efforts in Marawi, thus contributing to peace in the country. In the face of disasters, our two peoples have stood together and come to each other's help, writing new chapters of friendship between our two countries. 
当前，菲律宾人民在杜特尔特总统带领下，推动实施“社会经济发展十点规划”、“大建特建”，开创了国家发展欣欣向荣的局面。中国人民也在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。共同期盼、共同梦想将中菲两国人民紧密连接在一起。
Under President Duterte's leadership, the Philippine people are striving to implement the 10-Point Socioeconomic Agenda and the "Build, Build, Build" Strategy, making the country more and more prosperous. The Chinese people are working unremittingly to fulfill their "two centenary goals" and realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal. Our shared aspirations and dreams have forged a close bond between our peoples. 
我这次访问的主要目的，就是同杜特尔特总统就新形势下提升中菲全方位合作深入交换意见，作出全面部署，推动中菲关系在高水平上得到更大发展。
I am visiting this time mainly to have in-depth discussions with President Duterte on how to elevate our all-round cooperation under new circumstances and make an overall plan for greater progress in our relationship toward a higher level. There are a number of things we need to do if we are to achieve this goal. 
——深化政治互信，推动中菲关系行稳致远。中方愿同菲方一道，以更加开阔的视野谋划两国关系发展蓝图，就双边关系及重大国际和地区问题加强战略沟通。我们要通过友好协商妥善处理分歧，加强海上对话合作，让南海成为造福人民的和平之海、友谊之海、合作之海。
-- We need to deepen political mutual trust to sustain the growth of China-Philippine relations. China wishes to work with the Philippines to draw up blueprints for our future relations with a broader perspective, and strengthen strategic communication on bilateral ties and major regional and international issues. We need to properly handle differences through friendly consultations, enhance dialogue and cooperation on maritime issues, and make the South China Sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation that truly benefits our two peoples. 
——坚持合作谋实，确保中菲关系根基牢固。菲律宾地理位置得天独厚，是共建“一带一路”的天然伙伴。中方愿同菲方一道，续写古代海上丝绸之路新篇章，推动“一带一路”框架内战略对接，深化经贸、基础设施建设、农业、旅游等各领域互利合作，助力菲律宾实施更多民生项目，让两国民众从合作中不断增强获得感和幸福感。中方愿同菲方持续深化防务、禁毒、反恐、执法合作，为两国发展和地区和平稳定营造良好环境。
-- We need to enhance practical cooperation to cement the foundation of China-Philippine relations. The Philippines, with its unique geographical advantage, is a natural partner in the Belt and Road Initiative. China wishes to work with the Philippines to renew the legacy of the ancient maritime Silk Road. China will work with the Philippines to enhance synergy between our strategies under the Belt and Road Initiative, deepen mutually beneficial cooperation in business, trade, infrastructure, agriculture, tourism and other fields, and assist the Philippines in carrying out more livelihood projects so that through our cooperation, the people of our two countries will have a stronger sense of fulfillment and happiness. China will continue to deepen cooperation with the Philippines in defense, drug control, counter-terrorism and law enforcement to foster a sound environment for the development of our two countries and peace and stability of our region. 
——坚持民心相通，实现中菲关系恒久如一。中菲两国地缘相近、人缘相亲、文缘相通，人民友好交往是两国关系的源头活水。众人拾柴火焰高。我们要推动两国政党、议会、地方、智库往来，加强教育、科技、文化、青年交流，调动更多力量参与两国合作，让中菲友好薪火相传、生生不息。
-- We need to strengthen people-to-people ties to keep China-Philippine relations as strong as ever. China and the Philippines are very close to each other in terms of geographical location, ancestral ties and cultural background. Friendly exchanges between our two peoples are an endless source of strength for our relations. As the saying goes, the flames rise high when everybody joins to add fuel. We need to promote interactions between our political parties, parliaments, think tanks and at the local level. We need to increase exchanges on education, science and technology, culture and between the youths. We need to encourage broader participation in our cooperation. This way, the friendship between our peoples will grow from strength to strength and be passed on from generation to generation. 
——坚持携手共赢，促进东亚合作深入发展。今年是中国同东盟建立战略伙伴关系15周年。菲律宾去年成功举办东亚合作领导人系列会议，今年又接任中国－东盟关系协调国，使命光荣、责任重大。中方坚定支持菲律宾履行协调国职责，愿同菲方携起手来，推动中国－东盟关系优化升级，推动东亚合作得到更大发展。中方将加大对菲律宾首倡的东盟东部增长区投入，进一步提升双方合作，打造同东盟合作新增长点，帮助菲律宾棉兰老岛等地区更好发展。
-- We need to join hands to deepen East Asia cooperation for win-win results. This year marks the 15th anniversary of China-ASEAN strategic partnership. The Philippines successfully hosted the East Asia leaders' meetings last year, and has taken over the noble and important role and responsibilities as the country coordinator for China-ASEAN relations this year. China firmly supports the Philippines' role as the country coordinator, and will work with the Philippines to upgrade China-ASEAN relations and secure greater achievements in East Asia cooperation. China will increase input in the BIMP-EAGA initiative launched by the Philippines, foster new growth drivers for cooperation with ASEAN through closer cooperation with the Philippines, and assist with the development of Mindanao and other regions in the country. 
40年前，中国开始了改革开放伟大进程。40年众志成城、砥砺奋进，中国人民用双手书写了国家和民族发展的壮丽史诗。中国成为世界第二大经济体、第一大工业国、第一大货物贸易国、第一大外汇储备国，对全球经济增长的贡献率超过30%，实现了联合国标准下7亿多人口稳定脱贫。中国正在全面深化改革、扩大对外开放，我们的改革不会停止、开放不会止步。
China started its reform and opening-up four decades ago. Since then, the Chinese people have worked hard with unity and perseverance and written a great success story in the development of the Chinese nation. China has grown into the world's second largest economy, the largest industrial manufacturer, the largest trader of goods, and the holder of the largest foreign exchange reserves. China now contributes over 30 percent of global growth, and has lifted more than 700 million people out of poverty by the UN standard. Now, China is deepening reform across the board and opening itself wider, and our effort in reform and opening-up will never stop. 
贸易自由化、经济全球化的时代潮流不可阻挡。中国作为负责任大国，坚持合作共赢理念，坚持扩大对外开放，愿同各国分享中国市场的机遇和潜力，刚刚成功举办的首届中国国际进口博览会就是最好证明。中国欢迎菲律宾和更多国家搭乘中国发展的快车。我们将同各国一道，坚定维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，推动国际政治经济秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
Trade liberalization and economic globalization is an unstoppable trend of our times. As a major responsible country committed to win-win cooperation and greater openness, China stands ready to share with all countries the opportunities and potential of its market. This commitment is made abundantly clear by the very first China International Import Expo, which was just concluded successfully. China welcomes the Philippines and other countries on board the express train of its development. China will work with other countries to firmly uphold the WTO-centered multilateral trading system and promote the evolution of the international political and economic order in a fairer and more equitable direction. 
数百年前，中国国内生产总值就曾占世界30%，但中国从未对外侵略扩张。1840年鸦片战争后的100多年里，中国频遭侵略蹂躏之害，饱受战祸动乱之苦。孔子说：“己所不欲，勿施于人。”中国人民相信，只有和平安宁，才能发展繁荣。这不是权宜之计，更不是外交辞令，而是思想自信和实践自觉的有机统一。我们将坚持和平发展道路，始终做世界和亚太地区的和平稳定之锚。
Several centuries ago, China's GDP already accounted for 30 percent of the global total, yet it never engaged in aggression or expansion. In the over 100 years after the Opium War in 1840, China suffered immensely from repeated aggression, wars and turmoil. Confucius once said, "Do not do to others what you do not want others to do to you." We Chinese believe that peace and stability is the only way to development and prosperity. This is neither a choice of expediency nor a diplomatic rhetoric. It is our firm conviction and a guidance of what we practice on the ground. China will remain committed to the path of peaceful development and will always stay as an anchor of peace and stability for the Asia-Pacific and the wider world. 
菲律宾谚语说：“抓住今天，才能不丢失明天。”中方愿同菲方把握机遇、顺势而上，传承和发扬崇尚和平、讲信修睦的亚洲传统，巩固和发展好两国关系，携手开创两国和亚洲更加美好的明天！
As a Philippine proverb goes, "Seize today, or you will lose tomorrow." China will work with the Philippines to seize the opportunity and go along with the trend of our time. Let us work together to build upon the Asian tradition of peace, credibility and good neighborliness, and further consolidate the bilateral relations for an even brighter future of the two countries and of Asia as a whole.
