74. 习近平在智利媒体发表署名文章《共同开创中国和智利关系更加美好的未来》
共同开创中国和智利关系更加美好的未来 　　
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together for a More Promising Future of China-Chile Relations
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
智利被誉为“天涯之国”，依山傍海，风光壮美，物产富饶，文化灿烂。智利人民勤劳智慧，依靠自己的双手，发扬坚韧不拔的民族精神，创造了发展奇迹。	
Chile, known as "the land where the earth ends," is situated between the sea and mountains and boasts beautiful landscape, rich resources and splendid culture. The industrious and ingenious people of Chile, with their strengths and perseverance, have created a development miracle.
5年前，我到访智利，留下美好印象。今天，再次踏上这片美丽的土地，备感亲切，充满期待。	
Five years ago, I visited Chile and was deeply impressed by the country. Today, as I set foot on this beautiful land again, I feel very much at home and begin my visit with great expectations.
中智分处地球两端，相距遥远，但两国人民交往源远流长，结下了不解之缘。诺贝尔文学奖获得者、智利大诗人聂鲁达亲切地把中国称为“伟大的兄弟”。中国（China）和智利（Chile）不仅有着兄弟般的国名，两国人民还拥有兄弟般的友情。	
China and Chile are far away from each other, but the two peoples enjoy a long history of interactions and profound friendship. Pablo Neruda, a Nobel Prize laureate in literature and a major poet in Chile, referred to China affectionately as a "great brother." Even the names of our two countries, China and Chile, resemble those of two brothers and our two peoples have indeed fostered a brotherly relationship.
中智两国人民素有相知相亲的传统。两国人民隔海相望，彼此欣赏。聂鲁达多次访华，写下了《中国大地之歌》、《亚细亚之风》等歌颂和祝福中国的诗篇。他的作品在中国广为传颂，影响了许多中国诗人。智利著名画家万徒勒里旅居中国多年，他借鉴中国水墨丹青技法，创作了《长江》等作品，饱含着对中国的深深眷恋。这些诗歌和画作凝聚着中智两国人民深情厚谊。他们成立了拉美第一家民间对华友好组织——智中文化协会，带动一批批有识之士投身中智友好事业。在圣地亚哥有一所“长江小学”，寓意中智友谊如同长江一样，后浪推前浪。	
The two peoples have the tradition of mutual understanding and affection. Though our two peoples are separated by the ocean, we admire each other. Neruda paid multiple visits to China and wrote poems such as Cancion de la tierra China and El Viento de la Asia, in which he expressed his love and best wishes for China. His works have been widely read in China with influence on many Chinese poets. Jose Venturelli, a famous artist of Chile, lived in China for years. He learned from the skills of Chinese ink painting and created works such as the Yangtze River, which demonstrated his strong attachment to China. These poems and paintings reflect the profound friendship between the two peoples. These Chilean friends established the Chile-China Cultural Association, the first non-governmental organization committed to developing friendly ties with China in Latin America, and encouraged a great number of visionary people to join in the cause of growing China-Chile friendship. In Santiago, there is a Yangtze River Primary School, whose name signifies that China-Chile friendship is as vibrant as the Yangtze River.
中智两国人民素有守望相助的传统。在2010年那场举世瞩目的智利矿难救援行动中，中国机械设备制造企业积极参与，为营救33名矿工作出了贡献。2015年智利北部发生严重洪灾，中国第一时间向智方伸出援手，广大旅居智利的华侨华人也纷纷解囊相助，智方积极营救受困中国公民，体现了两国人民患难与共的真挚情感。	
The two peoples have the tradition of helping and supporting each other. When the devastating mining accident occurred in Chile in 2010, a Chinese equipment-making company was actively involved in the rescue operation and contributed to the rescue of 33 miners. In 2015 when north Chile was hit by a massive flood, China lent its support immediately and the Chinese community in Chile also made generous donations. Relevant authorities in Chile offered timely help to the Chinese nationals stranded in the flood. All this has reflected the sincere friendship between our two peoples who share weal and woe.
中智两国人民素有敢为人先的传统。两国关系创造了多项“第一”。46年前，阿连德总统以他非凡的远见卓识，在南美国家中第一个决定同新中国建立外交关系，开启了中智关系新篇章。智利是第一个就中国加入世界贸易组织同中方签署双边协议、第一个承认中国完全市场经济地位、第一个同中国签署双边自由贸易协定的拉美国家。在自由贸易协定带动下，2015年双边贸易额达到318亿美元，是10年前的近5倍。中国成为智利第一大贸易伙伴和铜、车厘子、蓝莓、海鲜、葡萄酒等产品的最大出口目的地，智利跃居中国在拉美的第三大贸易伙伴。不久前，中国建设银行智利分行作为拉美首家人民币清算行正式开业，为中智关系增添了新的“第一”。在两国历届政府和社会各界共同努力下，中智关系枝繁叶茂、硕果累累。	
The two peoples have the tradition of making pioneering efforts. A number of "firsts" have been achieved in our bilateral ties. Former President Salvador Allende, with his extraordinary vision, decided to establish diplomatic ties with New China 46 years ago, making Chile the first country in South America to do so and opening a new chapter in China-Chile relations. Chile was the first Latin American country to sign a bilateral agreement with China on its WTO accession, to recognize China as a full market economy and to sign with China a bilateral Free Trade Agreement (FTA). Driven by the FTA, our bilateral trade volume reached 31.8 billion U.S. dollars in 2015, nearly five folds of that ten years ago. China has become Chile's largest trading partner and its largest export market of such products as copper, cherry, blueberry, sea food and wine. Chile has become China's third largest trading partner in Latin America. Not long ago, China Construction Bank opened its branch in Chile and became the first RMB settlement bank in Latin America, adding another "first" to our relations. Thanks to the concerted efforts of our two governments and people from all sectors, our bilateral ties have grown from strength to strength and yielded fruitful results.
中国人将美好的姻缘称为“金玉良缘”。2008年北京奥运会金牌就是用智利金和中国玉制作而成。这一枚枚奖牌象征着中智两国人民情同手足的缘分。	
The Chinese people refer to a good relationship as "a bond of gold and jade." The gold medals for 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing were made of gold from Chile and jade from China. These medals are symbols of the brotherly relations between the Chinese and Chilean peoples.
中智关系之所以能够长期稳定发展，是因为双方坚持平等相待、互尊互信，是因为双方坚持优势互补、互利共赢，更是因为双方坚持与时俱进、开拓进取，推动两国关系迈向一个又一个新高度。	
The China-Chile ties have enjoyed long-term stable growth because both sides are committed to treating each other as equals with mutual respect and trust and leveraging mutual complementarity for win-win outcomes. More importantly, both sides have kept up with the times and made pioneering efforts to push bilateral relations to new highs.
当前，国际形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，世界经济复苏步履维艰，全球性挑战不断增多。中智两国都处在发展的关键阶段，面临相似的机遇和挑战。中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力。智利也在改革发展的道路上奋力前行。共同的发展使命将我们更加紧密地联系在一起。	
The international situation is now undergoing profound and complex changes. The world economic recovery is in difficulty and global challenges are on the rise. Both China and Chile are at a critical stage of development and face similar opportunities and challenges. The Chinese people are working hard for achieving the two centenary goals (i.e., to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the time the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary in 2021 and to turn China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious by the time the People's Republic of China celebrates its centenary in 2049) and realizing the great renewal of the Chinese nation. Chile is also making great efforts along its path of reform and development. Such a common mission of development has further strengthened our existing close ties.
拉美朋友常说，“独行快，众行远”。我期待通过这次访问，同智利各界朋友深入交流，发扬中智关系优良传统，规划两国合作新蓝图，推动中智两国在共同发展的道路上携手共进。	
Friends in Latin America often say that one can walk fast when traveling alone and walk a long distance when traveling with friends. I look forward to in-depth exchanges with friends from various sectors of Chile during this visit so that we can carry forward the fine tradition of China-Chile relations and draw a new blueprint for bilateral cooperation to advance common development of our two countries.
——我们要坚持相互尊重，筑牢政治基础。双方要加强全方位交往，坚定支持对方走符合本国国情的发展道路，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持。	
-- We should remain committed to mutual respect and consolidate political foundation for our relations. Our two countries should strengthen exchanges in all aspects, give each other firm support in our respective efforts to follow a development path suited to our national realities and render each other understanding and support on issues bearing on each other's core interests and major concerns.
——我们要加强战略对接，促进共同发展。双方要完善自由贸易区建设，促进贸易和投资便利化，提升相互投资水平，深化矿业、农业、基础设施建设、通信、清洁能源、科技创新等领域合作，给两国人民带来更多福祉。	
-- We should enhance our complementarity and promote common development. Our two countries should improve the building of FTA, promote trade and investment facilitation and increase mutual investment. We should deepen cooperation in mining, agriculture, infrastructure, communications, clean energy and scientific innovation so as to bring more benefits to the two peoples.
——我们要扩大人文交流，巩固传统友谊。智利文学家米斯特拉尔说，“友谊是相互信任，是长存于心”。双方要常来常往，扩大文化、教育、体育、旅游等领域交流合作，让两国人民友谊薪火相传。	
-- We should expand cultural and people-to-people exchanges and consolidate traditional friendship. Gabriela Mistral, a Chilean writer, said that friendship is mutual trust deeply rooted in heart. Our two sides should further facilitate people-to-people exchanges and expand cooperation in such areas as culture, education, sports and tourism so that the friendship between the two peoples will be carried forward from generation to generation.
——我们要加强战略协作，维护共同利益。中智都是环太平洋重要国家，双方要加强在联合国、亚太经合组织等多边机制内的沟通和协调，加快推动亚太自由贸易区建设，为世界经济发展增添新动力。	
-- We should strengthen strategic coordination and uphold our common interest. China and Chile, as two important Pacific-rim countries, should enhance communication and coordination in the United Nations, APEC and other multilateral mechanisms and push for the building of the Asia-Pacific FTA so as to add new impetus to the world economic development.
当前，拉美国家在发展道路上面临的挑战有所增多，但依然是充满希望的热土。正如聂鲁达所说，“如果我们看一看美洲地图，正视那伟大的万千气象”，我们就会对拉美的未来信心倍增。智利是拉美的门户，目前担任拉美太平洋联盟轮值主席国，在地区事务中发挥着重要作用。中方愿同智方一道，推动中拉全面合作伙伴关系得到更大发展，构建携手共进的命运共同体。	
Although Latin American countries now face more challenges on their way to development, this land is still full of hope. As Neruda once said, if we look at the map of America, we will find a very promising vista. We will then have greater confidence in the future of Latin America. Chile, as the gateway to Latin America and the current rotating chair of the Pacific Alliance, plays an important role in regional affairs. China is ready to work with Chile to push China-Latin America Comprehensive Cooperative Partnership forward for greater development and build a community of shared future.
“海内存知己，天涯若比邻。”在经济全球化、社会信息化深入发展的今天，太平洋早已不再是将中国和智利分开的屏障，而是联系我们的纽带和桥梁。让我们一起努力，携手开创中智关系更加美好的未来。	
As a Chinese poem goes, "If you have a friend afar who knows your heart, distance can't keep you two apart." With the advancement of economic globalization and IT application, the Pacific Ocean can no longer keep China and Chile apart. Instead, it is a bond or a bridge linking our two countries. So let us work together for a more promising future of China-Chile relations.
