119. 习近平在博鳌亚洲论坛开幕式上的演讲
迈向命运共同体 开创亚洲新未来
Towards a Community of Common Destiny and A New Future for Asia
——在博鳌亚洲论坛2015年年会上的主旨演讲
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
President of the People's Republic of China
2015年3月28日，海南博鳌
At the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2015 Boao, 28 March 2015
尊敬的各位元首，各位政府首脑，
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
各位部长，
Ministers,
各位国际和地区组织负责人，
Heads of International and Regional Organizations,
尊敬的博鳌亚洲论坛理事会各位成员，
Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia,
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
今天的博鳌，海阔帆舞，天高风暖。在这个美好的季节里，各方嘉宾相聚一堂，共商亚洲和亚洲同世界各地区发展大计，具有十分重要的意义。
Boao today greets us with vast ocean, high sky and warm breeze. In this beautiful season of spring, it is of great significance that so many distinguished guests gather here to discuss the development strategies for Asia and the world.
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾出席博鳌亚洲论坛2015年年会，表示诚挚的欢迎！对年会的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！
At the outset, let me extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, heartfelt welcome to all the distinguished guests attending the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2015, and my warm congratulations on the opening of the conference.
本届博鳌亚洲论坛年会以“亚洲新未来：迈向命运共同体”为主题，可谓恰逢其时，既有重要的现实意义，也有长远的历史意义。希望大家畅所欲言，为亚洲和世界和平与发展贡献真知灼见。
The theme of this year's conference is "Asia's New Future: Towards a Community of Common Destiny". The timing could not be better in that the theme has not only great immediate relevance but also long-term historical significance. And I am looking to all of you to express yourselves fully and contribute your insightful views to the cause of peace and development of Asia and beyond.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
历史，总是在一些重要时间节点上更能勾起人们的回忆和反思。今年是世界反法西斯战争暨中国人民抗日战争胜利70周年，联合国成立70周年，万隆会议召开60周年，东盟共同体建成之年。这是值得人们纪念的重要年份，也是激发人们铭记历史、鉴往知来的重要时刻。
There are certain historic occasions that are likely to remind people of what happened in the past and set people reflecting on them. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the World Anti-Fascist War, the victory of the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and the founding of the United Nations. This year is also the 60th anniversary of the Bandung Conference and will witness the completion of the ASEAN Community. As such, it is an important year to be commemorated as well as a historic juncture to reflect on the past and look to the future.
70年来，世界发生了前所未有的深刻变化，历史性地改变了人类的命运。全球殖民体系土崩瓦解，冷战对峙不复存在，各国相互联系、相互依存日益加深，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流滚滚向前，国际力量对比朝着有利于维护世界和平的方向发展，保持国际形势总体稳定、促进各国共同发展具备更多有利条件。
Over the past 70 years, the world has experienced profound changes as never before, making a difference to the destiny of mankind. With the days of global colonialism and the Cold War long gone, countries are now increasingly interconnected and interdependent. Peace, development and win-win cooperation have become the prevailing trend of our times. The international forces are shifting in a way that is more favorable to maintaining world peace. Countries are now in a better position to uphold general stability in the world and seek common development.
70年来，亚洲形势也发生了前所未有的变化。地区各国实现了民族独立、掌握了自己的命运，壮大了维护地区和世界和平的力量。亚洲国家率先倡导和平共处五项原则，并同非洲国家一道，在万隆会议上提出处理国家间关系的十项原则。冷战结束后，亚洲国家在推进区域合作实践中逐步形成相互尊重、协商一致、照顾各方舒适度的亚洲方式。这些都为正确处理国家关系、推动建立新型国际关系作出了历史性贡献。
Over the past 70 years, Asia has also gone through unprecedented changes. After gaining national independence, Asian countries took their destiny in their own hands and strengthened the force for regional and world peace. Asian countries were the first to advocate the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence and, together with African countries, put forward the Ten Principles on handling state-to-state relations at the Bandung Conference. Since the end of the Cold War, Asian countries have gradually come up with an Asian way of cooperation in the course of advancing regional cooperation, which features mutual respect, consensus-building and accommodation of each other's comfort levels. All this has contributed to a proper approach to state-to-state relations and to progress in building a new type of international relations.
70年来，越来越多的亚洲国家找到适合本国国情的发展道路，从贫穷落后走向发展振兴，步入经济发展快车道。区域和跨区域合作方兴未艾，互联互通建设加速推进，呈现千帆竞发、百舸争流的强劲势头。亚洲已经拥有世界三分之一的经济总量，是当今世界最具发展活力和潜力的地区之一，在世界战略全局中的地位进一步上升。
Over the past 70 years, more and more Asian countries have found development paths that suit their own national conditions and embarked on a fast-track of economic growth. Having emerged from poverty and backwardness, they are on course to achieve development and prosperity. Regional and inter-regional cooperation is flourishing. Connectivity is pursued at a faster pace. As a result, there is a strong momentum in Asia with countries striving to outperform each other. Accounting for one third of the world economy, Asia is one of the most dynamic regions with the most potential and its global strategic importance has been rising.
70年来，亚洲国家逐步超越意识形态和社会制度差异，从相互封闭到开放包容，从猜忌隔阂到日益增多的互信认同，越来越成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。在争取民族独立的伟大斗争中，在应对亚洲金融危机和国际金融危机的艰难时刻，在抗击印度洋海啸和中国汶川特大地震等灾害的紧要关头，亚洲各国人民守望相助，克服和战胜了一个又一个困难和挑战，展现出同舟共济、共克时艰的强大力量，正可谓患难见真情。同时，亚洲地区仍然存在一些历史遗留问题和现实矛盾分歧，面临各类传统和非传统安全威胁，地区国家发展经济、改善民生、消除贫困的任务依然艰巨。
Over the past 70 years, Asian countries have gradually transcended their differences in ideology and social system. No longer cut off from each other, they are now open and inclusive, with suspicion and estrangement giving way to growing trust and appreciation. The interests of Asian countries have become intertwined, and a community of common destiny has increasingly taken shape. Be it the arduous struggle for national independence, or the difficult periods of the Asian financial crisis and the international financial crisis, or the hard time in the wake of devastating disasters including the Indian Ocean tsunami and earthquake in Wenchuan, China, the people of Asian countries have always come to those in need with a helping hand and worked together to overcome one challenge after another, demonstrating the power of unity in face of difficulties and the spirit of sharing weal and woe. This said, Asia still faces numerous challenges. Some are the old issues left over from history and others are new ones associated with current disputes. Asia is also confronted with various traditional and non-traditional security threats. Hence it remains an uphill battle for Asian countries to grow the economy, improve people's livelihood and eliminate poverty.
回顾70年的历程，今天亚洲取得的发展成就，是亚洲各国人民一代接一代持续奋斗的结果，是许多政治家和仁人志士艰辛努力的结果。明天，新加坡将为李光耀先生举行国葬。李光耀先生是受到国际社会尊重的战略家和政治家，为亚洲和平与发展以及亚洲同世界的交流合作作出了突出贡献。借此机会，我向包括李光耀先生在内的所有为亚洲和平发展作出贡献的先贤们，致以崇高的敬意。
A review of the path traversed over the past 70 years shows that what has been accomplished in Asia today is attributable to the persistent efforts of several generations of people in Asian countries and to the hard work of many statesmen and people of great vision. Tomorrow, Singapore will hold a state funeral for Mr. Lee Kuan Yew. Mr. Lee was a strategist and statesman respected across the world for his outstanding contribution to the peace and development of Asia and the exchanges and cooperation between Asia and the world. I want to take this opportunity to pay high tribute to Mr. Lee Kuan Yew and all those who made contribution to Asia's peace and development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
亚洲是世界的亚洲。亚洲要迈向命运共同体、开创亚洲新未来，必须在世界前进的步伐中前进、在世界发展的潮流中发展。
Asia belongs to the world. For Asia to move towards a community of common destiny and embrace a new future, it has to follow the world trend and seek progress and development in tandem with that of the world.
当前，国际形势继续发生深刻复杂变化，世界多极化、经济全球化深入发展，文化多样化、社会信息化持续推进，国际格局和国际秩序加速调整演变。世界各国正抓紧调整各自发展战略，推动变革创新，转变经济发展方式，调整经济结构，开拓新的发展空间。同时，世界经济仍处于深度调整期，低增长、低通胀、低需求同高失业、高债务、高泡沫等风险交织，主要经济体走势和政策取向继续分化，经济环境的不确定性依然突出；地缘政治因素更加突出，局部动荡此起彼伏；恐怖主义、网络安全、能源安全、粮食安全、气候变化、重大传染性疾病等非传统安全和全球性挑战不断增多，南北发展差距依然很大。推进人类和平与发展的崇高事业依然任重而道远。
The international situation continues to experience profound and complex changes, with significant development in multipolarization and economic globalization. Cultural diversity and IT application are making constant progress while readjustment is accelerating in international landscape and order. Countries around the world are losing no time in adjusting their development strategies, pursuing transformation and innovation, changing their economic development models, improving economic structures and opening up new horizons for further development. At the same time, however, the world economy is still in a period of profound adjustment, with risks of low growth, low inflation and low demand interwoven with risks of high unemployment, high debt and high level of bubbles. The performance and policies of major economies continue to diverge, and uncertainties in the economic climate remain prominent. Geopolitical factors are more at play and local turmoils keep cropping up. Non-traditional security threats and global challenges including terrorism, cyber security, energy security, food security, climate change and major infectious diseases are on the rise, and the North-South gap is still wide. The noble cause of peace and development remains a long and arduous journey for mankind.
人类只有一个地球，各国共处一个世界。世界好，亚洲才能好；亚洲好，世界才能好。面对风云变幻的国际和地区形势，我们要把握世界大势，跟上时代潮流，共同营造对亚洲、对世界都更为有利的地区秩序，通过迈向亚洲命运共同体，推动建设人类命运共同体。借此机会，我愿就此谈一谈看法，同各位嘉宾交流。
We have only one planet, and countries share one world. To do well, Asia and the world could not do without each other. Facing the fast changing international and regional landscapes, we must see the whole picture, follow the trend of our times and jointly build a regional order that is more favorable to Asia and the world. We should, through efforts towards such a community for Asia, promote a community of common interest for all mankind. I wish to take this opportunity to share with you my thoughts on this vision.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持各国相互尊重、平等相待。各国体量有大小、国力有强弱、发展有先后，但都是国际社会平等一员，都有平等参与地区和国际事务的权利。涉及大家的事情要由各国共同商量来办。作为大国，意味着对地区和世界和平与发展的更大责任，而不是对地区和国际事务的更大垄断。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to make sure that all countries respect one another and treat each other as equals. Countries may differ in size, strength or level of development, but they are all equal members of the international community with equal rights to participate in regional and international affairs. On matters that involve us all, we should discuss and look for a solution together. Being a big country means shouldering greater responsibilities for regional and world peace and development, as opposed to seeking greater monopoly over regional and world affairs.
相互尊重、平等相待，首先要尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，客观理性看待别国发展壮大和政策理念，努力求同存异、聚同化异。要共同维护亚洲来之不易的和平稳定局面和良好发展势头，反对干涉别国内政，反对为一己之私搞乱地区形势。
To respect one another and treat each other as equals, countries need to, first and foremost, respect other countries' social systems and development paths of their own choice, respect each other's core interests and major concerns and have objective and rational perception of other countries' growing strength, policies and visions. Efforts should be made to seek common ground while shelving differences, and better still to increase common interests and dissolve differences. The hard-won peace and stability in Asia and the sound momentum for development should be upheld by all. All of us must oppose interference in other countries' internal affairs and reject attempts to destablize the region out of selfish motives.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持合作共赢、共同发展。东南亚朋友讲“水涨荷花高”，非洲朋友讲“独行快，众行远”，欧洲朋友讲“一棵树挡不住寒风”，中国人讲“大河有水小河满，小河有水大河满”。这些说的都是一个道理，只有合作共赢才能办大事、办好事、办长久之事。要摒弃零和游戏、你输我赢的旧思维，树立双赢、共赢的新理念，在追求自身利益时兼顾他方利益，在寻求自身发展时促进共同发展。合作共赢的理念不仅适用于经济领域，也适用于政治、安全、文化等广泛领域；不仅适用于地区国家之间，也适用于同域外国家开展合作。要加强宏观经济政策协调，防范不同经济体经济政策变动可能带来的负面外溢效应，积极推动全球经济治理变革，维护开放型世界经济体制，共同应对世界经济中的风险和挑战。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to seek win-win cooperation and common development. Our friends in Southeast Asia say that the lotus flowers grow taller as the water rises. Our friends in Africa say that if you want to go fast, walk alone; and if you want to go far, walk together. Our friends in Europe say that a single tree cannot block the chilly wind. And Chinese people say that when big rivers have water, the small ones are filled; and when small rivers have water, the big ones are filled. All these sayings speak to one same truth, that is, only through win-win cooperation can we make big and sustainable achievements that are beneficial to all. The old mindset of zero-sum game should give way to a new approach of win-win and all-win cooperation. The interests of others must be accommodated while pursuing one's own interests, and common development must be promoted while seeking one's own development. The vision of win-win cooperation not only applies to the economic field, but also to the political, security, cultural and many other fields. It not only applies to countries within the region, but also to cooperation with countries from outside the region. We should enhance coordination of macroeconomic policies to prevent negative spill-over effects that may arise from economic policy changes in individual economies. We should actively promote reform of global economic governance, uphold an open world economy, and jointly respond to risks and challenges in the world economy.
中国和东盟国家携手建设更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体，东盟和中国、日本、韩国致力于2020年建成东亚经济共同体。我们要积极构建亚洲自由贸易网络，争取在2015年完成中国－东盟自由贸易区升级谈判和区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判。在推进亚洲经济一体化的同时，我们要坚持开放的区域主义，协调推进包括亚太经合组织在内的跨区域合作。
China and ASEAN countries will join hands in building an even closer China-ASEAN community of common destiny. The building of an East Asia economic community for ASEAN, China, Japan and ROK will be completed in 2020. We should actively build a free trade cooperation network in Asia and strive to conclude negotiations on an upgraded China-ASEAN FTA and on Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) in 2015. In advancing economic integration in Asia, we need to stay committed to open regionalism and move forward trans-regional cooperation, including APEC, in a coordinated manner.
我们要积极推动构建地区金融合作体系，探讨搭建亚洲金融机构交流合作平台，推动亚洲基础设施投资银行同亚洲开发银行、世界银行等多边金融机构互补共进、协调发展。要加强在货币稳定、投融资、信用评级等领域务实合作，推进清迈倡议多边化机制建设，建设地区金融安全网。要推动建设亚洲能源资源合作机制，保障能源资源安全。
We will vigorously promote a system of regional financial cooperation, explore a platform for exchanges and cooperation among Asian financial institutions, and advance complementary and coordinated development between the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and such multilateral financial institutions as the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank. We will strengthen practical cooperation in currency stability, investment and financing, and credit rating, make progress in institution building for the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization and build a regional financial security network. We will work towards an energy and resources cooperation mechanism in Asia to ensure energy and resources security.
中方倡议加快制定东亚和亚洲互联互通规划，促进基础设施、政策规制、人员往来全面融合。要加强海上互联互通建设，推进亚洲海洋合作机制建设，促进海洋经济、环保、灾害管理、渔业等各领域合作，使海洋成为连接亚洲国家的和平、友好、合作之海。
China proposes that plans be formulated regarding connectivity building in East Asia and Asia at large to advance full integration in infrastructure, policies and institutions and personnel flow. We may increase maritime connectivity, speed up institution building for marine cooperation in Asia, and step up cooperation in marine economy, environmental protection, disaster management and fishery. This way, we could turn the seas of Asia into seas of peace, friendship and cooperation for Asian countries.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持实现共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全。当今世界，安全的内涵和外延更加丰富，时空领域更加宽广，各种因素更加错综复杂。各国人民命运与共、唇齿相依。当今世界，没有一个国家能实现脱离世界安全的自身安全，也没有建立在其他国家不安全基础上的安全。我们要摒弃冷战思维，创新安全理念，努力走出一条共建、共享、共赢的亚洲安全之路。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. In today's world, security means much more than before and its implications go well beyond a single region or time frame. All sorts of factors could have a bearing on a country's security. As people of all countries share common destiny and become increasingly interdependent, no country could have its own security ensured without the security of other countries or of the wider world. The Cold War mentality should truly be discarded and new security concepts be nurtured as we explore a path for Asia that ensures security for all, by all and of all.
各国都有平等参与地区安全事务的权利，也都有维护地区安全的责任，每一个国家的合理安全关切都应该得到尊重和保障。要通盘考虑亚洲安全问题的历史经纬和现实状况，多管齐下、综合施策，协调推进地区安全治理，统筹维护传统和非传统领域安全。要通过对话合作促进各国和本地区安全，以合作谋和平、以合作促安全，坚持以和平方式解决争端，反对动辄使用武力或以武力相威胁。要坚持发展和安全并重，以可持续发展促进可持续安全。亚洲国家要加强同其他地区国家和有关组织合作，欢迎各方为亚洲发展和安全发挥积极和建设性作用。
We believe that countries are all entitled to take an equal part in regional security affairs and all are obliged to work to ensure security for the region. The legitimate security concerns of each country need to be respected and addressed. At the same time, in handling security issues in Asia, it is important to bear in mind both the history and reality of Asia, take a multi-pronged and holistic approach, improve coordinated regional security governance, and safeguard security in both the traditional and non-traditional realms. It is important to conduct dialogue and cooperation to enhance security at national and regional levels, and to increase cooperation as the way to safeguard peace and security. It is important to resolve disputes through peaceful means, and oppose the willful use or threat of force. Security should be given equal emphasis as development, and sustainable development surely provides a way to sustainable security. Countries in Asia need to step up cooperation with countries and organizations outside the region and all parties are welcome to play a positive and constructive role in upholding development and security in Asia.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持不同文明兼容并蓄、交流互鉴。在漫长历史长河中，如亚洲的黄河和长江流域、印度河和恒河流域、幼发拉底河和底格里斯河流域以及东南亚等地区孕育了众多古老文明，彼此交相辉映、相得益彰，为人类文明进步作出了重要贡献。今天的亚洲，多样性的特点仍十分突出，不同文明、不同民族、不同宗教汇聚交融，共同组成多彩多姿的亚洲大家庭。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to ensure inclusiveness and mutual learning among civilizations. History, over the past millennia, has witnessed ancient civilizations appear and thrive along the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers, the Indus, the Ganges, the Euphrates, and the Tigris River as well as in Southeast Asia, each adding its own splendour to the progress of human civilization. Today, Asia has proudly maintained its distinct diversity and still nurtures all the civilizations, ethnic groups and religions in this big Asian family.
中国古代思想家孟子说过：“夫物之不齐，物之情也。”不同文明没有优劣之分，只有特色之别。要促进不同文明不同发展模式交流对话，在竞争比较中取长补短，在交流互鉴中共同发展，让文明交流互鉴成为增进各国人民友谊的桥梁、推动人类社会进步的动力、维护世界和平的纽带。
Mencius, the great philosopher in ancient China, said, "Things are born to be different." Civilizations are only unique, and no one is superior to the other. There need to be more exchange and dialogue among civilizations and development models, so that each could draw on the strength of the other and all could thrive and prosper by way of mutual learning and common development. Let us promote inter-civilization exchanges to build bridges of friendship for our people, drive human development and safeguard peace of the world.
中方倡议召开亚洲文明对话大会，加强青少年、民间团体、地方、媒体等各界交流，打造智库交流合作网络，让亚洲人民享受更富内涵的精神生活，让地区发展合作更加活力四射。
China proposes that a conference of dialogue among Asian civilizations be held to provide a platform upon which to enhance interactions among the youth, people's groups, local communities and the media and to form a network of think-tank cooperation, so as to add to Asian people's rich cultural life and contribute to more vibrant regional cooperation and development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
中国人民正在按照全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党的战略布局，齐心协力为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。借此机会，我愿重申，在前进道路上，中国坚持和平发展，决心不会动摇；坚持共同发展，理念不会动摇；坚持亚太合作发展，政策不会动摇。
Right now, the Chinese people are working in unison under the strategic plans to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and to comprehensively deepen reform, advance law-based governance, and enforce strict Party conduct. Our objective is to realize the "two centenary" goals for China's development and for realizing the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. I wish to use this opportunity to reaffirm China's commitment to the path of peaceful development, and to promoting cooperation and common development in the Asia-Pacific. China will be firm in its determination and resolve and all its policies will be designed to achieve such a purpose.
中国经济发展进入新常态，正从高速增长转为中高速增长，从规模速度型粗放增长转向质量效率型集约增长，从要素投资驱动转向创新驱动。2014年，中国经济实现了7.4%的增长，劳动生产率提高了7%，单位国内生产总值能耗下降了4.8%，国内消费贡献度上升，服务业发展加快，发展质量和效益不断提高。我们看中国经济，不能只看增长率，中国经济体量不断增大，现在增长7%左右的经济增量已相当可观，集聚的动能是过去两位数的增长都达不到的。中国经济体量大、韧性好、潜力足、回旋空间大、政策工具多。中国将主动适应和引领经济发展新常态，坚持以提高经济发展质量和效益为中心，把转方式调结构放到更加重要位置，更加扎实地推进经济发展，更加坚定地深化改革开放，更加充分地激发创造活力，更加有效地维护公平正义，更加有力地保障和改善民生，促进经济社会平稳健康发展。
Now, the Chinese economy has entered a state of new normal. It is shifting gear from high speed to medium-to-high speed growth, from an extensive model that emphasized scale and speed to a more intensive one emphasizing quality and efficiency, and from being driven by investment in production factors to being driven by innovation. China's economy grew by 7.4% in 2014, with 7% increase in labor productivity and 4.8% decrease in energy intensity. The share of domestic consumption in GDP rose, the services sector expanded at a faster pace, and the economy's efficiency and quality continued to improve. When looking at China's economy, one should not focus on growth rate only. As the economy continues to grow in size, around 7% growth would be quite impressive, and the momentum it generates would be larger than growth at double digits in previous years. It is fair to say that the Chinese economy is highly resilient and has much potential, which gives us enough room to leverage a host of policy tools. Having said that, China will continue to be responsive to the new trend and take initiatives to shape the new normal in our favor. We will focus on improving quality and efficiency, and give even greater priority to shifting the growth model and adjusting the structure of development. We will make more solid efforts to boost economic development and deepen reform and opening-up. We will take more initiatives to unleash the creativity and ingenuity of the people, be more effective in safeguarding equity and social justice, raise people's living standards and make sure that China's economic and social development are both sound and stable.
中国经济发展进入新常态，将继续给包括亚洲国家在内的世界各国提供更多市场、增长、投资、合作机遇。未来5年，中国进口商品将超过10万亿美元，对外投资将超过5000亿美元，出境旅游人数将超过5亿人次。中国将坚持对外开放的基本国策，不断完善国内投资环境，保护投资者合法权益，同大家一起，共同驱动亚洲发展的列车，不断驶向更加光明的未来。
This new normal of the Chinese economy will continue to bring more opportunities of trade, growth, investment and cooperation for other countries in Asia and beyond. In the coming five years, China will import more than US$10 trillion of goods, Chinese investment abroad will exceed US$500 billion, and more than 500 million outbound visits will be made by Chinese tourists. China will stick to its basic state policy of opening up, improve its investment climate, and protect the lawful rights and interests of investors. I believe that together, the people of Asian countries could drive this train of Asia's development to take Asia to an even brighter future.
中国最需要和谐稳定的国内环境与和平安宁的国际环境，任何动荡和战争都不符合中国人民根本利益。中华民族历来爱好和平，自古就崇尚“以和为贵”、“协和万邦”、“四海之内皆兄弟也”等思想。中国近代以后遭遇了100多年的动荡和战火，中国人民绝不会将自己曾经遭受过的悲惨经历强加给其他国家和民族。纵观历史，任何国家试图通过武力实现自己的发展目标，最终都是要失败的。中国将毫不动摇坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持走和平发展道路，坚持互利共赢的开放战略，秉持正确义利观，推动建立以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，始终做维护世界和平、促进共同发展的坚定力量。
What China needs most is a harmonious and stable domestic environment and a peaceful and tranquil international environment. Turbulence or war runs against the fundamental interests of the Chinese people. The Chinese nation loves peace and has, since ancient times, held high such philosophies that "harmony is the most valuable", "peace and harmony should prevail" and "all men under heaven are brothers". China has suffered from turbulence and war for more than a century since modern times, and the Chinese people would never want to inflict the same tragedy on other countries or peoples. History has taught us that no country who tried to achieve its goal with force ever succeeded. China will be steadfast in pursuing the independent foreign policy of peace, the path of peaceful development, the win-win strategy of opening-up, and the approach of upholding justice while pursuing shared interests. China will work to promote a new type of international relations of win-win cooperation and will always remain a staunch force for world peace and common development.
“远亲不如近邻。”这是中国人很早就认识到的一个朴素的生活道理。中国坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，坚持睦邻、安邻、富邻，秉持亲诚惠容的理念，不断深化同周边国家的互利合作和互联互通，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家。中国已经同8个周边国家签署睦邻友好合作条约，正在商谈签署中国－东盟睦邻友好合作条约，并愿同所有周边国家商签睦邻友好合作条约，为双边关系发展和地区繁荣稳定提供有力保障。
Close neighbors are better than distant relatives. This is a simple truth that the Chinese people got to know in ancient times. That explains China's firm commitment to building friendship and partnership with its neighbors to foster an amicable, secure and prosperous neighborhood. Under the principle of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness, China is working actively to deepen win-win cooperation and connectivity with its neighbors to bring them even more benefit with its own development. China has signed treaties of good-neighborliness, friendship and cooperation with eight of its neighbors and is holding discussion to sign a same treaty with ASEAN. China stands ready to sigh such a treaty with all its neighbors to provide strong support for the development of bilateral relations as well as prosperity and stability in the region.
2013年我访问哈萨克斯坦和印度尼西亚时，分别提出建设丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路合作倡议。“一带一路”合作倡议契合中国、沿线国家和本地区发展需要，符合有关各方共同利益，顺应了地区和全球合作潮流。
In 2013, during my visit to Kazakhstan and Indonesia, I put forward the initiatives of building a Silk Road economic belt and a 21st century maritime Silk Road. The "Belt and Road" initiative, meeting the development needs of China, countries along the routes and the region at large, will serve the common interests of relevant parties and answer the call of our time for regional and global cooperation.
“一带一路”建设秉持的是共商、共建、共享原则，不是封闭的，而是开放包容的；不是中国一家的独奏，而是沿线国家的合唱。“一带一路”建设不是要替代现有地区合作机制和倡议，而是要在已有基础上，推动沿线国家实现发展战略相互对接、优势互补。目前，已经有60多个沿线国家和国际组织对参与“一带一路”建设表达了积极态度。“一带一路”建设、亚洲基础设施投资银行都是开放的，我们欢迎沿线国家和亚洲国家积极参与，也张开臂膀欢迎五大洲朋友共襄盛举。
In promoting this initiative, China will follow the principle of wide consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. The programs of development will be open and inclusive, not exclusive. They will be a real chorus comprising all countries along the routes, not a solo for China itself. To develop the Belt and Road is not to replace existing mechanisms or initiatives for regional cooperation. Much to the contrary, we will build on the existing basis to help countries align their development strategies and form complementarity. Currently, more than 60 countries along the routes and international organizations have shown interest in taking part in the development of the Belt and the Road. The "Belt and Road" and the AIIB are both open initiatives. We welcome all countries along the routes and in Asia, as well as our friends and partners around the world, to take an active part in these endeavors.
“一带一路”建设不是空洞的口号，而是看得见、摸得着的实际举措，将给地区国家带来实实在在的利益。在有关各方共同努力下，“一带一路”建设的愿景与行动文件已经制定，亚洲基础设施投资银行筹建工作迈出实质性步伐，丝路基金已经顺利启动，一批基础设施互联互通项目已在稳步推进。这些早期收获向我们展现了“一带一路”的广阔前景。
The "Belt and Road" initiative is not meant as rhetoric. It represents real work that could be seen and felt to bring real benefits to countries in the region. Thanks to the concerted efforts of relevant parties, the vision and action paper of the initiative has been developed. Substantive progress has been made in the establishment of the AIIB. The Silk Road Fund has been launched, and constructions of a number of infrastructure connectivity projects are moving forward. These early harvests have truly pointed to the broad prospects the "Belt and Road" initiative will bring.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
人类和平与发展的事业是崇高的事业，也是充满挑战的事业。前进的道路不会一帆风顺，期望的成果不会唾手可得。不管征程多么曲折、多么漫长，胜利总是属于那些永不放弃、百折不挠、携手前行的人们。我相信，只要我们大家认准目标、锲而不舍，就一定能携手迈向命运共同体、开创亚洲新未来！
The cause of peace and development of mankind is as lofty as its is challenging. The journey ahead will not be smooth sailing, and success may not come easily. No matter how long and difficult the journey may be, those who work together and never give up will eventually prevail. I believe that as long as we keep to our goals and make hard efforts, we will together bring about a community of common destiny and usher in a new future for Asia.
最后，预祝年会取得圆满成功！
I wish the Annual Conference a complete success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you very much.
