107. 习近平在第七十届联合国大会一般性辩论时的讲话
携手构建合作共赢新伙伴 同心打造人类命运共同体
——在第七十届联合国大会
一般性辩论时的讲话
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
（2015年9月28日，纽约）
Working Together to Create a New Mutually Beneficial Partnership and Community of Shared Future for Mankind
— Speech at the General Debate of
the 70th Session of the UN General Assembly
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
New York, September 28, 2015
主席先生，各位同事：	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
70年前，我们的先辈经过浴血奋战，取得了世界反法西斯战争的胜利，翻过了人类历史上黑暗的一页。这一胜利来之不易。	
Seventy years ago, an earlier generation fought heroically and secured victory in the World Anti-Fascist War, closing a dark page in the annals of human history. That victory was hard won.
70年前，我们的先辈以远见卓识，建立了联合国这一最具普遍性、代表性、权威性的国际组织，寄托人类新愿景，开启合作新时代。这一创举前所未有。	
Seventy years ago, that generation, with vision and foresight, established the United Nations. This universal and most representative and authoritative international organization has carried mankind's hope for a new future and ushered in a new era of cooperation. This was a pioneering initiative never before undertaken.
70年前，我们的先辈集各方智慧，制定了联合国宪章，奠定了现代国际秩序基石，确立了当代国际关系基本准则。这一成就影响深远。	
Seventy years ago, that generation pooled together their wisdom and adopted the Charter of the United Nations, laying the cornerstones of contemporary international order, and establishing the fundamental principles of contemporary international relations. This was an achievement of profound impact.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
9月3日，中国人民同世界人民一道，隆重纪念了中国人民抗日战争暨世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年。作为东方主战场，中国付出了伤亡3500多万人的民族牺牲，抗击了日本军国主义主要兵力，不仅实现了国家和民族的救亡图存，而且有力支援了在欧洲和太平洋战场上的抵抗力量，为赢得世界反法西斯战争胜利作出了历史性贡献。	
On the third of September, the people of China, together with the rest of humanity, solemnly commemorated the 70th anniversary of victory in the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and the World Anti-Fascist War. As the main theater in the East, China made a national sacrifice of over 35 million casualties in its fight against the main forces of Japanese militarism. It not only saved itself and its people from subjugation, but also gave strong support to the forces combatting aggression in the European and Pacific theaters, thus making a historic contribution to ultimate victory.
历史是一面镜子。以史为鉴，才能避免重蹈覆辙。对历史，我们要心怀敬畏、心怀良知。历史无法改变，但未来可以塑造。铭记历史，不是为了延续仇恨，而是要共同引以为戒。传承历史，不是为了纠结过去，而是要开创未来，让和平的薪火代代相传。	
History is a mirror. Only by drawing lessons from history can the world avoid repeating past calamity. We should view history with awe and through the prism of human conscience. The past cannot be changed, but the future can be shaped. To bear history in mind is not to perpetuate hatred. Rather, its purpose is to ensure that mankind does not forget its lessons. Remembering history does not mean being obsessed with the past. Rather, in doing so, we aim to create a better future and pass the torch of peace from generation to generation.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
联合国走过了70年风风雨雨，见证了各国为守护和平、建设家园、谋求合作的探索和实践。站在新的历史起点上，联合国需要深入思考如何在21世纪更好回答世界和平与发展这一重大课题。	
Over the past seven decades the United Nations has gone through the tests of time. It has witnessed efforts made by all countries to uphold peace, build their own countries, and pursue cooperation. Having reached a new historical starting point, the United Nations needs to address the central issue of how to better promote world peace and development in the 21st century.
世界格局正处在一个加快演变的历史性进程之中。和平、发展、进步的阳光足以穿透战争、贫穷、落后的阴霾。世界多极化进一步发展，新兴市场国家和发展中国家崛起已经成为不可阻挡的历史潮流。经济全球化、社会信息化极大解放和发展了社会生产力，既创造了前所未有的发展机遇，也带来了需要认真对待的新威胁新挑战。	
The world is going through a historical process of accelerated evolution. The light of peace, development and progress will be powerful enough to dispel the clouds of war, poverty and backwardness. The movement toward a multi-polar world and the rise of emerging markets and developing countries has become an irresistible trend of history. Economic globalization and the advent of an information age have unleashed and boosted vast new social productive forces. They have created unprecedented development opportunities while giving rise to new threats and challenges which we must face squarely.
“大道之行也，天下为公。”和平、发展、公平、正义、民主、自由，是全人类的共同价值，也是联合国的崇高目标。目标远未完成，我们仍须努力。当今世界，各国相互依存、休戚与共。我们要继承和弘扬联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，打造人类命运共同体。为此，我们需要作出以下努力。	
As an ancient Chinese adage goes, "The greatest ideal is to create a world truly shared by all." Peace, development, equality, justice, democracy and freedom are common values of all mankind and the lofty goals of the United Nations. Yet these goals are far from being achieved; therefore we must continue our endeavors. In today's world, all countries are interdependent and share a common future. We should renew our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, build a new model of international relations featuring mutually beneficial cooperation, and create a community of shared future for mankind. To achieve this goal, we need to direct our efforts as follows:
——我们要建立平等相待、互商互谅的伙伴关系。联合国宪章贯穿主权平等原则。世界的前途命运必须由各国共同掌握。世界各国一律平等，不能以大压小、以强凌弱、以富欺贫。主权原则不仅体现在各国主权和领土完整不容侵犯、内政不容干涉，还应该体现在各国自主选择社会制度和发展道路的权利应当得到维护，体现在各国推动经济社会发展、改善人民生活的实践应当受到尊重。	
— We should build partnerships in which countries treat each other as equals, engage in mutual consultation and show mutual understanding. The principle of sovereign equality underpins the Charter of the United Nations. The future of the world must be shaped by all countries. All countries are equals. The large, the strong and the rich should not bully the small, the weak and the poor. The principle of sovereignty is not just limited to the idea that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries is inviolable, and that their internal affairs are not to be subject to interference. It also means that all countries have a right to make their own choice of social systems and development paths, that this right should be upheld, and that all countries' endeavors to promote economic and social development and improve their people's lives should be respected.
我们要坚持多边主义，不搞单边主义；要奉行双赢、多赢、共赢的新理念，扔掉我赢你输、赢者通吃的旧思维。协商是民主的重要形式，也应该成为现代国际治理的重要方法，要倡导以对话解争端、以协商化分歧。我们要在国际和区域层面建设全球伙伴关系，走出一条“对话而不对抗，结伴而不结盟”的国与国交往新路。大国之间相处，要不冲突、不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢。大国与小国相处，要平等相待，践行正确义利观，义利相兼，义重于利。	
We should be committed to multilateralism and reject unilateralism. We should adopt a new vision of seeking positive outcomes for all, and reject the outdated mindset that one side's gain means the other side's loss, or that the winner takes all. Consultation is an important form of democracy, and it should also become an important means of exercising international governance. We should resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should forge a global partnership at both international and regional levels, and embrace a new approach to state-to-state relations, one that features dialogue rather than confrontation, and seeks partnership rather than alliance. Major countries should follow the principles of no conflict, no confrontation, mutual respect and mutually beneficial cooperation in handling their relations. Major powers should treat small countries as equals, and take an ethical approach to justice and their own interests by putting justice before their own interests.
——我们要营造公道正义、共建共享的安全格局。在经济全球化时代，各国安全相互关联、彼此影响。没有一个国家能凭一己之力谋求自身绝对安全，也没有一个国家可以从别国的动荡中收获稳定。弱肉强食是丛林法则，不是国与国相处之道。穷兵黩武是霸道做法，只能搬起石头砸自己的脚。	
— We should create a security environment featuring fairness, justice, joint participation and shared benefits. In the age of economic globalization, the security of all countries is interlinked and every one impacts on every other. No country can maintain absolute security by its own efforts, and no country can achieve stability by destabilizing other countries. The law of the jungle leaves the weak at the mercy of the strong; it is not the way for countries to conduct their relations. Those who adopt the self-serving approach of using force will find that they are only lifting a rock to drop on their own feet.
我们要摒弃一切形式的冷战思维，树立共同、综合、合作、可持续安全的新观念。我们要充分发挥联合国及其安理会在止战维和方面的核心作用，通过和平解决争端和强制性行动双轨并举，化干戈为玉帛。我们要推动经济和社会领域的国际合作齐头并进，统筹应对传统和非传统安全威胁，防战争祸患于未然。	
We should abandon the Cold War mentality in all its manifestations, and foster a new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should give full play to the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council in ending conflict and keeping peace, and adopt the dual approach of seeking peaceful solutions to disputes and taking mandatory actions, so as to turn hostility into amity. We should advance international cooperation in both economic and social fields and take a holistic approach to addressing traditional and non-traditional security threats, so as to prevent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
——我们要谋求开放创新、包容互惠的发展前景。2008年爆发的国际经济金融危机告诉我们，放任资本逐利，其结果将是引发新一轮危机。缺乏道德的市场，难以撑起世界繁荣发展的大厦。富者愈富、穷者愈穷的局面不仅难以持续，也有违公平正义。要用好“看不见的手”和“看得见的手”，努力形成市场作用和政府作用有机统一、相互促进，打造兼顾效率和公平的规范格局。	
— We should promote open, innovative and inclusive development that benefits all. The 2008 international financial crisis has taught us that allowing capital to blindly pursue profit will result in chaos, and that global prosperity cannot be built on the shaky foundations of a market without moral constraints. The growing gap between rich and poor is both unfair and unsustainable. It is important for us to use both the invisible hand and the visible hand to form synergy between market forces and government functions, and strive to achieve both efficiency and fairness.
大家一起发展才是真发展，可持续发展才是好发展。要实现这一目标，就应该秉承开放精神，推进互帮互助、互惠互利。当今世界仍有8亿人生活在极端贫困之中，每年近600万孩子在5岁前夭折，近6000万儿童未能接受教育。刚刚闭幕的联合国发展峰会制定了2015年后发展议程。我们要将承诺变为行动，共同营造人人免于匮乏、获得发展、享有尊严的光明前景。	
Development is meaningful only when it is inclusive and sustainable. To achieve such development requires openness, mutual assistance and cooperation. In the world today, close to 800 million people still live in extreme poverty, nearly 6 million children die before the age of five each year, and nearly 60 million children are unable to go to school. The just-concluded UN Sustainable Development Summit adopted the Post-2015 Development Agenda. We must translate our commitments into actions and work together to ensure that everyone is free from want, has access to development, and lives with dignity.
——我们要促进和而不同、兼收并蓄的文明交流。人类文明多样性赋予这个世界姹紫嫣红的色彩，多样带来交流，交流孕育融合，融合产生进步。	
— We should increase inter-civilization exchanges to promote harmony, inclusiveness and respect for differences. The world is more colorful as a result of its cultural diversity. Diversity breeds exchanges, exchanges create integration, and integration makes progress possible.
文明相处需要和而不同的精神。只有在多样中相互尊重、彼此借鉴、和谐共存，这个世界才能丰富多彩、欣欣向荣。不同文明凝聚着不同民族的智慧和贡献，没有高低之别，更无优劣之分。文明之间要对话，不要排斥；要交流，不要取代。人类历史就是一幅不同文明相互交流、互鉴、融合的宏伟画卷。我们要尊重各种文明，平等相待，互学互鉴，兼收并蓄，推动人类文明实现创造性发展。	
In their interactions, civilizations must accept their differences. Only through mutual respect, mutual learning, and harmonious coexistence can the world maintain its diversity and thrive. Each social model represents the unique vision and contribution of its people, and no model is superior to others. Different civilizations should engage in dialogue and exchanges instead of trying to exclude or replace each other. The history of mankind is a process of active exchanges, interactions, and integration among different civilizations. We should respect all civilizations and treat each other as equals. We should draw inspiration from each other to boost the creative development of human civilization.
——我们要构筑尊崇自然、绿色发展的生态体系。人类可以利用自然、改造自然，但归根结底是自然的一部分，必须呵护自然，不能凌驾于自然之上。我们要解决好工业文明带来的矛盾，以人与自然和谐相处为目标，实现世界的可持续发展和人的全面发展。	
— We should build an ecosystem that puts Mother Nature and green development first. Mankind may utilize nature and even try to transform it. But we are ultimately a part of nature. We should care for nature and not place ourselves above it. We should reconcile industrial development with nature and pursue harmony between man and nature to achieve sustainable development throughout the world and the all-round development of humanity.
建设生态文明关乎人类未来。国际社会应该携手同行，共谋全球生态文明建设之路，牢固树立尊重自然、顺应自然、保护自然的意识，坚持走绿色、低碳、循环、可持续发展之路。在这方面，中国责无旁贷，将继续作出自己的贡献。同时，我们敦促发达国家承担历史性责任，兑现减排承诺，并帮助发展中国家减缓和适应气候变化。	
To build a sound ecology is vital for mankind's future. All members of the international community should work together to build a sound global eco-environment. We should respect nature, follow nature's ways, and protect nature. We should firmly pursue green, low-carbon, circular, and sustainable development. China will shoulder its share of responsibility and continue to play its part in this common endeavor. We also urge developed countries to fulfill their historical responsibilities, honor their emission reduction commitments, and help developing countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
13亿多中国人民正在为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。中国人民的梦想同各国人民的梦想息息相通。实现中国梦，离不开和平的国际环境和稳定的国际秩序，离不开各国人民的理解、支持、帮助。中国人民圆梦必将给各国创造更多机遇，必将更好促进世界和平与发展。	
More than 1.3 billion Chinese people are endeavoring to realize the Chinese Dream of great national renewal. The dream of the Chinese people is closely connected with the dreams of other peoples of the world. We cannot realize the Chinese Dream without a peaceful international environment, a stable international order, and the understanding, support and help of the rest of the world. The realization of the Chinese Dream will bring greater opportunities to other countries and contribute to global peace and development.
中国将始终做世界和平的建设者，坚定走和平发展道路，无论国际形势如何变化，无论自身如何发展，中国永不称霸、永不扩张、永不谋求势力范围。	
China will continue to participate in building world peace. We are committed to peaceful development. No matter how the international landscape may evolve and how strong we may become, China will never pursue hegemony or expansion, or seek to create spheres of influence.
中国将始终做全球发展的贡献者，坚持走共同发展道路，继续奉行互利共赢的开放战略，将自身发展经验和机遇同世界各国分享，欢迎各国搭乘中国发展“顺风车”，一起来实现共同发展。	
China will continue to contribute to global development. We will continue to pursue common progress and the mutually beneficial strategy of opening up. We are ready to share our experience and opportunities with other countries and welcome them to join us on our voyage and sail together with us towards common development.
中国将始终做国际秩序的维护者，坚持走合作发展的道路。中国是第一个在联合国宪章上签字的国家，将继续维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序和国际体系。中国将继续同广大发展中国家站在一起，坚定支持增加发展中国家特别是非洲国家在国际治理体系中的代表性和发言权。中国在联合国的一票永远属于发展中国家。	
China will continue to uphold the international order. We will remain committed to the path of development through cooperation. China was the first country to put its signature on the Charter of the United Nations. We will continue to uphold the international order and system underpinned by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. China will continue to stand together with other developing countries. We firmly support greater representation and say for developing countries, especially African countries, in international governance. China's vote in the United Nations will always belong to the developing countries.
在此，我宣布，中国决定设立为期10年、总额10亿美元的中国－联合国和平与发展基金，支持联合国工作，促进多边合作事业，为世界和平与发展作出新的贡献。我宣布，中国将加入新的联合国维和能力待命机制，决定为此率先组建常备成建制维和警队，并建设8000人规模的维和待命部队。我宣布，中国决定在未来5年内，向非盟提供总额为1亿美元的无偿军事援助，以支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设。	
I wish to take this opportunity to announce China's decision to establish a 10-year, US$1 billion China-UN peace and development fund to support the United Nations' work, advance multilateral cooperation, and make a greater contribution to world peace and development. I wish to announce that China will join the new UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, and has thus decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad and building a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops. I also wish to announce that China will provide a total of US$100 million of free military aid to the African Union in the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
在联合国迎来又一个10年之际，让我们更加紧密地团结起来，携手构建合作共赢新伙伴，同心打造人类命运共同体。让铸剑为犁、永不再战的理念深植人心，让发展繁荣、公平正义的理念践行人间！	
As the United Nations enters a new decade, let us unite ever more closely to create a new mutually beneficial partnership and community of shared future for mankind. Let the vision of a world free of war and enjoying lasting peace take root in our hearts. Let the aspirations of development, prosperity, fairness and justice spread across the world!
谢谢各位。	
Thank you.
