共同开创金砖合作第二个“金色十年”
Working Together to Usher in the Second "Golden Decade" of BRICS Cooperation
——在金砖国家工商论坛开幕式上的讲话
（2017年9月3日，厦门）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平

尊敬的特梅尔总统、尊敬的祖马总统，
Your Excellency President Michel Temer, Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,
各位工商界代表，
Representatives of the Business Community,
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
下午好！很高兴同大家相聚在风景怡人的“鹭岛”厦门。明天，金砖国家领导人会晤就要拉开帷幕。我谨代表中国政府和中国人民、代表厦门市民，并以我个人的名义，向参加会议的各位嘉宾表示热烈的欢迎！
Good afternoon! It is my great pleasure to have all of you with us in the beautiful city of Xiamen, renowned as the "Egret Island". The BRICS Summit will be held tomorrow. On behalf of the Chinese government and people and the people of Xiamen, and also in my own name, I warmly welcome all of you to the Business Forum.
厦门自古就是通商裕国的口岸，也是开放合作的门户，正所谓“厦庇五洲客，门纳万顷涛”。1985年我来到福建工作，厦门是第一站。当时的厦门身处中国改革开放前沿，是先行先试的经济特区，也是一片发展的热土。30多载春风化雨，今天的厦门已经发展成一座高素质的创新创业之城，新经济新产业快速发展，贸易投资并驾齐驱，海运、陆运、空运通达五洲。今天的厦门也是一座高颜值的生态花园之城，人与自然和谐共生。
Xiamen has been a trading port since ancient times as well as a gateway of China's opening up and external cooperation. Embracing the vast ocean, the city has hosted visitors from around the world. On a personal note, Xiamen is where I started off when I came to Fujian Province to take up a new post in 1985. Back then, being one of the earliest special economic zones in China, the city was at the forefront of China's reform and opening up endeavor and was brimming with development opportunities. Three decades later, Xiamen has become well known for its innovation and entrepreneurship, with burgeoning new economic forms and new industries, robust trade and investment and easy access to the world with air, land and sea links. Today, Xiamen is a beautiful garden city with perfect harmony between man and nature.
闽南民众常说，“爱拼才会赢”。这其中蕴含着一种锐意进取的精神。厦门这座城市的成功实践，折射着13亿多中国人民自强不息的奋斗史。改革开放近40年来，在中国共产党领导下，中国人民凭着一股逢山开路、遇水架桥的闯劲，凭着一股滴水穿石的韧劲，成功走出一条中国特色社会主义道路。我们遇到过困难，我们遇到过挑战，但我们不懈奋斗、与时俱进，用勤劳、勇敢、智慧书写着当代中国发展进步的故事。
There is a popular saying here in southern Fujian, "Dedicate yourself and you will win," which embodies an enterprising spirit. Xiamen's success is a good example demonstrating the perseverance of the 1.3 billion-plus Chinese people. In close to 40 years of reform and opening up, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, we Chinese have forged ahead, fearless and determined, and we have successfully embarked on a path of socialism with distinctive Chinese features. We have encountered difficulties and challenges on the way forward. But we have persevered and kept pace with the times. With dedication, courage and ingenuity, we are making great progress in pursuing development in today's China.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
金砖合作正处在承前启后的关键节点上。观察金砖合作发展，有两个维度十分重要。一是要把金砖合作放在世界发展和国际格局演变的历史进程中来看。二是要把金砖合作放在五国各自和共同发展的历史进程中来看。
BRICS cooperation has now reached a crucial stage of development. In assessing its performance, it is important to bear two things in mind: the historical course of global development and evolving international landscape and the historical process of development of the BRICS countries, both individually and collectively, in the context of which BRICS cooperation is pursued.
现在，我们正处在一个大发展大变革大调整的时代。虽然全球范围内冲突和贫困尚未根除，但和平与发展的时代潮流愈发强劲。世界多极化、经济全球化、文化多样化、社会信息化深入发展，弱肉强食的丛林法则、你输我赢的零和游戏不再符合时代逻辑，和平、发展、合作、共赢成为各国人民共同呼声。
We are in a great era of development, transformation and adjustment. Although conflict and poverty are yet to be eliminated globally, the trend toward peace and development has grown ever stronger. Our world today is becoming increasingly multipolar; the economy has become globalized; there is growing cultural diversity; and the society has become digitized. The law of the jungle where the strong prey on the weak and the zero-sum game are rejected, and peace, development and win-win cooperation have become the shared aspiration of all peoples.
在这样的大背景下，一大批新兴市场国家和发展中国家异军突起，在国际事务中发挥着日益重要的作用。金砖合作也应运而生，我们五国怀着追求和平与发展的共同愿望走到一起。在过去10年中，金砖国家携手同行，成长为世界经济的新亮点。
Against such a backdrop, a large number of emerging market and developing countries have come to the fore, playing an ever greater role in international affairs. BRICS cooperation is a natural choice made by our five countries, as we all share a desire for peace and development. In the past decade, we BRICS countries have surged ahead and become a bright spot in the global economy.
——10年中，金砖国家探索进取，谋求共同发展。2008年爆发的国际金融危机突如其来，直接导致世界经济急刹车，至今未能重回正轨。面对外部环境突然变化，我们五国立足国内，集中精力发展经济、改善民生。10年间，五国经济总量增长179%，贸易总额增长94%，城镇化人口增长28%，为世界经济企稳复苏作出突出贡献，也让30多亿人民有了实实在在的获得感。
-- The past decade has seen the BRICS countries making headway in pursuing common development. The sudden outbreak of the 2008 global financial crisis left the world economy reeling, which is yet to fully recover. Facing the external shock, our five countries have held the ground by strengthening the domestic economy, boosting growth and improving people's livelihood. In the past ten years, our combined GDP has grown by 179%, trade by 94% and urban population by 28%. All this has contributed significantly to stabilizing the global economy and returning it to growth, and it has delivered tangible benefits to three billion and more people.
——10年中，金砖国家务实为先，推进互利合作。我们五国发挥互补优势，拉紧利益纽带，建立起领导人引领的全方位、多层次合作架构，涌现出一批契合五国发展战略、符合五国人民利益的合作项目。特别是新开发银行和应急储备安排的建立，为金砖国家基础设施建设和可持续发展提供了融资支持，为完善全球经济治理、构建国际金融安全网作出了有益探索。
-- The past decade has seen the BRICS countries advancing results-oriented and mutually beneficial cooperation. Leveraging our respective strengths and converging interests, we have put in place a leaders-driven cooperation framework that covers wide-ranging areas and multiple levels. A number of cooperation projects have been launched that are in keeping with our five countries' development strategies and meet the interests of our peoples. In particular, the New Development Bank and the Contingent Reserve Arrangement have provided financing support for infrastructure building and sustainable development of the BRICS countries, contributing to enhanced global economic governance and the building of an international financial safety net.
——10年中，金砖国家敢于担当，力求在国际舞台上有所作为。我们五国秉持多边主义，倡导公平正义，就国际和地区重大问题发出声音、提出方案。我们五国积极推动全球经济治理改革，提升新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权。我们五国高举发展旗帜，带头落实千年发展目标和可持续发展目标，加强同广大发展中国家对话合作，谋求联合自强。
-- The past decade has seen the BRICS countries endeavoring to fulfill their international responsibility. Committed to multilateralism, fairness and justice, our five countries have staked out our positions on major regional and international issues and made our proposals to address them. We have promoted reform of global economic governance to increase the representation and say of emerging market and developing countries. As a champion of development, we have taken the lead in implementing the Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development Goals, and engaged in close dialogue and cooperation with other developing countries to pursue development through unity.
万丈高楼平地起。如今，金砖合作基础已经打下，整体架构轮廓初现。回望来时路，我认为有3条启示十分重要，应该在今后的合作中发扬光大。
As an old saying goes, the construction of a tall building starts with its foundation. We have laid the foundation and put in place the framework of BRICS cooperation. In reviewing the past progress of BRICS cooperation, I believe there are three important practices that should be carried forward.
一是平等相待、求同存异。金砖国家不搞一言堂，凡事大家商量着来。我们五国尊重彼此发展道路和模式，相互照顾关切，致力于增进战略沟通和政治互信。我们五国在国情、历史、文化等方面存在差异，合作中难免遇到一些分歧，但只要坚定合作信念、坚持增信释疑，就能在合作道路上越走越稳。
First, treating each other as equals and seeking common ground while shelving differences. In terms of BRICS cooperation, decisions are made through consultation among us all, not by one country alone. We respect each other's path and model of development, accommodate each other's concerns and work to enhance strategic communication and political mutual trust. Given differences in national conditions, history and culture, it is only natural that we may have some differences in pursuing our cooperation. However, with strong faith in cooperation and commitment to enhancing trust, we can achieve steady progress in our cooperation.
二是务实创新、合作共赢。金砖国家不是碌碌无为的清谈馆，而是知行合一的行动队。我们五国以贸易投资大市场、货币金融大流通、基础设施大联通、人文大交流为目标，推进各领域务实合作，目前已经涵盖经贸、财金、科教、文卫等数十个领域，对合作共赢的新型国际关系作出生动诠释。
Second, taking a results-oriented, innovative approach to make our cooperation benefit all. BRICS is not a talking shop, but a task force that gets things done. Our goal is to build a big market of trade and investment, promote smooth flow of currency and finance, improve connectivity of infrastructure and build close bond between the people. In pursuing this goal, our five countries are engaged in practical cooperation across the board, covering several dozen areas, including economy, trade, finance, science, technology, education, culture and health, thus giving concrete expression to the endeavor of building a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation.
三是胸怀天下、立己达人。金砖国家都是在发展道路上一步一步走过来的，对那些身处战乱和贫困的百姓，我们感同身受。我们五国从发起之初便以“对话而不对抗，结伴而不结盟”为准则，倡导遵循联合国宪章宗旨和原则以及国际法和国际关系基本准则处理国家间关系，愿在实现自身发展的同时同其他国家共享发展机遇。如今，金砖合作理念得到越来越多理解和认同，成为国际社会的一股正能量。
Third, developing ourselves to help others with the well-being of the world in our mind. Having gone through an arduous course of development, we BRICS countries share the agony of those people who are still caught in chaos and poverty. Since the very beginning, our five countries have been guided by the principle of dialogue without confrontation, partnership without alliance. We are committed to observing the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, international law and basic norms governing international relations in conducting state-to-state relations. When developing ourselves, we are ready to share development opportunities with other countries. The philosophy of BRICS cooperation has gained growing appreciation and endorsement, and it has become a positive energy in the international community.
这些都是金砖精神的具体体现，是我们五国历经10年合作凝聚的共同价值追求。这种精神在实践中不断升华，为五国人民带来福祉，也让世界因金砖合作而有所不同。
All this is what the BRICS spirit is about. It is the shared value that has bound us in the past decade's cooperation. This spirit, constantly enriched over the years, has not only benefited our peoples but also enabled us to make a difference in the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
回首过去，是为了找准前进方向。放眼世界，我们看到世界经济重新恢复增长，新兴市场国家和发展中国家表现突出。新一轮科技革命和产业变革蓄势待发，改革创新潮流奔腾向前。我们有足够的理由相信，这个世界会更好。
Reviewing past progress helps us forge ahead in the right direction. Currently, the global economy has resumed growth, with emerging market and developing countries delivering a strong performance. A new round of technological and industrial revolution is in the making, and reform and innovation are gaining momentum. We have enough reason to believe that our world will be a better place.
同时，我们也看到，全球7亿多人口还在忍饥挨饿，数以千万的难民颠沛流离，无数民众包括无辜的孩子丧身炮火。世界经济尚未走出亚健康和弱增长的调整期，新动能仍在孕育。经济全球化遭遇更多不确定性，新兴市场国家和发展中国家发展的外部环境更趋复杂。世界和平与发展之路还很长，前行不会一路坦途。
On the other hand, more than 700 million people are still living in hunger; tens of millions of people are displaced and become refugees; so many people, including innocent children, are killed in conflicts. The global economy is still not healthy enough and remains in a period of adjustment featuring weak growth, and new growth drivers are yet to emerge. Economic globalization is facing more uncertainties. Emerging market and developing countries find themselves in a more complex external environment. The long road to global peace and development will not be a smooth one.
现在，有人看到金砖国家等新兴市场国家和发展中国家的增长出现起伏，就断言“金砖失色、褪色”。毋庸讳言，受内外复杂环境影响，金砖国家发展难免遭遇不同程度的逆风。但是，金砖国家不断向前发展的潜力和趋势没有改变。我们对此充满信心。
Some people, seeing that emerging market and developing countries have experienced growth setbacks, assert that the BRICS countries are losing their luster. It is true that affected by complex internal and external environments, we BRICS countries have encountered headwinds of varying intensity. But the growth potential and trend of our countries remain unchanged, and we are fully confident about it.
千年潮未落，风起再扬帆。面向未来，金砖国家面临着发展经济、加强合作的重要任务。我们要总结成功经验，勾画合作愿景，踏上新的征程，共同开创金砖合作第二个“金色十年”。
It is time to set sail when the tide rises. Going forward, we BRICS countries have a major task to accomplish, which is growing our economies and strengthening cooperation. We should build on past success, chart the course for future cooperation and embark on a new journey to jointly usher in the second "Golden Decade" of BRICS cooperation.
第一，深化金砖合作，助推五国经济增加动力。近年来，金砖国家凭借大宗商品供给、人力资源成本、国际市场需求等优势，引领世界经济增长。随着五国经济不断发展，资源要素配置、产业结构等问题日渐突出。同时，世界经济结构经历深刻调整，国际市场需求萎缩，金融风险积聚。金砖国家经济传统优势在发生变化，进入到滚石上山、爬坡过坎的关键阶段。
First, we should boost BRICS cooperation to create new impetus for economic growth of our five countries. In recent years, thanks to our strengths in terms of commodities supply, cost of human resources and international market demand, our five countries have driven global growth. As our five economies continue to grow, however, issues concerning resources allocation and industrial structure have become more acute. At the same time, the global economic structure is going through profound changes, evidenced by shrinking global demand and rising financial risks. All this has posed challenges to the traditional strengths of the BRICS economies, taking us to a crucial stage where we must work harder to overcome difficulties.
如何跨越这一阶段？答案是不能片面追求增长速度，而是要立足自身、放眼长远，推进结构性改革，探寻新的增长动力和发展路径。要把握新工业革命的机遇，以创新促增长、促转型，积极投身智能制造、互联网+、数字经济、共享经济等带来的创新发展浪潮，努力领风气之先，加快新旧动能转换。要通过改革打破制约经济发展的藩篱，扫清不合理的体制机制障碍，激发市场和社会活力，实现更高质量、更具韧性、更可持续的增长。
How should we get through this stage? Growth rate alone is not the answer. Instead, we should, on the basis of our current conditions and bearing in mind the long-term goal, advance structural reform and explore new growth drivers and development paths. We should seize the opportunity presented by the new industrial revolution to promote growth and change growth model through innovation. We should pursue innovation-driven development created by smart manufacturing, the "Internet Plus" model, digital economy and sharing economy, stay ahead of the curve and move faster to replace old growth drivers with new ones. We should eliminate impediments to economic development through reform, remove systemic and institutional barriers, and energize the market and the society, so as to achieve better quality, more resilient and sustainable growth.
金砖国家虽然国情不同，但处于相近发展阶段，具有相同发展目标。我们应该共同探索经济创新增长之道，加强宏观政策协调和发展战略对接，发挥产业结构和资源禀赋互补优势，培育利益共享的价值链和大市场，形成联动发展格局。我们要用改革创新的实践经验，为其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家抢抓机遇、应对挑战闯出一条新路。
Despite different national conditions, we BRICS countries are at a similar development stage and share the same development goals. We should jointly explore ways to boost innovation-driven growth. This requires us to improve macroeconomic policy coordination, synergize our respective development strategies, leverage our strengths in terms of industrial structure and resources endowment, and create value chains and a big market for shared interests, so as to achieve interconnected development. Basing ourselves on our own practices of reform and innovation, we should blaze a new path which may also help other emerging market and developing countries to seize opportunities and meet challenges.
经济合作是金砖机制的根基。我们应该紧紧围绕这条主线，落实《金砖国家经济伙伴战略》，推动各领域合作机制化、实心化，不断提升金砖合作含金量。今年，我们在新开发银行和应急储备安排建设、电子商务、贸易和投资便利化、服务贸易、本币债券、科技创新、工业合作、政府和社会资本合作等领域取得了一系列成果，拓展了经济合作广度和深度。我们要继续努力，落实以往的成果和共识，让现有机制发挥作用，同时积极探索务实合作新方式新内涵，拉紧联系纽带，让金砖合作行稳致远。
Economic cooperation is the foundation of the BRICS mechanism. With this focus in mind, we should implement the Strategy for BRICS Economic Partnership, institutionalize and substantiate cooperation in various sectors, and continue to enhance the performance of BRICS cooperation. This year, we have made progress in the operation of the New Development Bank and Contingent Reserve Arrangement, and in e-commerce, trade and investment facilitation, trade in services, local currency bond issuance, scientific and technological innovation, industrial cooperation and public-private partnership, thus expanding and intensifying economic cooperation. We should continue to implement agreements and consensus already reached and better leverage the role of current mechanisms. We should also actively explore new ways and new areas of practical cooperation and strengthen our ties to ensure durable and fruitful BRICS cooperation.
第二，勇担金砖责任，维护世界和平安宁。和平与发展互为基础和前提。要和平不要冲突、要合作不要对抗是世界各国人民共同愿望。在各国一道努力下，世界总体和平得以保持半个多世纪。但是，世界仍不太平，地区冲突和热点问题一波未平、一波又起。恐怖主义、网络安全等威胁相互交织，为世界蒙上一层阴影。
Secondly, we BRICS countries should shoulder our responsibilities to uphold global peace and stability. Peace and development underpin and reinforce each other. People around the world want peace and cooperation, not conflict or confrontation. Thanks to the joint efforts of all countries, global peace has reigned for more than half a century. However, incessant conflicts in some parts of the world and hotspot issues are posing challenges to world peace. The intertwined threats of terrorism and lack of cybersecurity, among others, have cast a dark shadow over the world.
金砖国家是世界和平的维护者、国际安全秩序的建设者。今年，我们举行安全事务高级代表会议和外长正式会晤，建立常驻多边机构代表定期磋商机制，召开外交政策磋商、反恐工作组、网络安全工作组、维和事务磋商等会议，就是要加强在国际和地区重大问题上的沟通和协调，汇聚金砖合力。我们要维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则以及国际关系基本准则，坚定维护多边主义，推动国际关系民主化，反对霸权主义和强权政治。要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，建设性参与地缘政治热点问题解决进程，发挥应有作用。
We BRICS countries are committed to upholding global peace and contributing to the international security order. This year, we have held the Meeting of High Representatives for Security Issues and the Meeting of Ministers of Foreign Affairs/International Relations. We have put in place the regular meeting mechanism for our permanent representatives to the multilateral institutions, and convened the Foreign Policy Planning Dialogue, the Meeting of Counter-Terrorism Working Group, the Meeting of Cybersecurity Working Group, and the Consultation on Peacekeeping Operations. These efforts aim to strengthen consultation and coordination on major international and regional issues and build synergy among the BRICS countries. We should uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and basic norms governing international relations, firmly support multilateralism, work for greater democracy in international relations, and oppose hegemonism and power politics. We should foster the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and take a constructive part in the process of resolving geopolitical hotspot issues and make our due contributions.
我相信，只要坚持综合施策、标本兼治，坚决打击一切形式的恐怖主义，恐怖分子终将无处容身。只要坚持对话协商谈判，为叙利亚、利比亚、巴以等问题的政治解决创造条件，战火终将平息，流离失所的难民定能重返家园。
I am convinced that as long as we take a holistic approach to fighting terrorism in all its forms, and address both its symptoms and root causes, terrorists will have no place to hide. When dialogue, consultation and negotiation are conducted to create conditions for achieving political settlement of issues such as Syria, Libya and the Palestine-Israel conflict, the flame of war can be put out, and displaced refugees will eventually return to their homes.
第三，发挥金砖作用，完善全球经济治理。唯有开放才能进步，唯有包容才能让进步持久。由于近年来世界经济处于疲弱期，发展失衡、治理困境、公平赤字等问题显得更加突出，保护主义和内顾倾向有所上升。世界经济和全球经济治理体系进入调整期，面临新的挑战。
Thirdly, we BRICS countries should contribute to enhancing global economic governance. Only openness delivers progress, and only inclusiveness sustains such progress. Due to sluggish global growth in recent years, such issues as uneven development, inadequate governance and deficit of fairness have become more acute, and protectionism and inward-looking mentality are on the rise. The global economy and global economic governance system, having entered a period of adjustment, face new challenges.
对经济全球化进程中出现的问题，我们不能视而不见，也不能怨天尤人，而是要齐心协力拿出解决方案。我们要同国际社会一道，加强对话、协调、合作，为维护和促进世界经济稳定和增长作出积极贡献。为此，我们应该推动建设开放型世界经济，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，合力打造新的全球价值链，实现经济全球化再平衡，使之惠及各国人民。我们五国要相互提高开放水平，在开放中做大共同利益，在包容中谋求机遇共享，为五国经济发展开辟更加广阔的空间。
We should not ignore problems arising from economic globalization or just complain about them. Rather, we should make joint efforts to find solutions. We should work together with other members of the international community to step up dialogue, coordination and cooperation and contribute to upholding and securing global economic stability and growth. To this end, we should promote the building of an open global economy, advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, jointly build new global value chains, and rebalance economic globalization. Doing so will bring benefits to people across the world. We five countries should open more to each other, expand converging interests in this process, take an inclusive approach and share opportunities, so as to create even brighter prospects for growing the economies of the five countries.
新兴市场国家和发展中国家的发展，不是要动谁的奶酪，而是要努力把世界经济的蛋糕做大。我们要合力引导好经济全球化走向，提供更多先进理念和公共产品，推动建立更加均衡普惠的治理模式和规则，促进国际分工体系和全球价值链优化重塑。要推动全球经济治理体系变革，反映世界经济格局现实，并且完善深海、极地、外空、网络等新疆域的治理规则，确保各国权利共享、责任共担。
The development of emerging market and developing countries is not intended to move the cheese of anyone but to make the pie of the global economy bigger. We should join hands to steer the course of economic globalization, offer more vision and public goods, make the governance model and rules more balanced and inclusive, and improve and reshape international division of labor and global value chains. We should work to reform the global economic governance system to make it commensurate with the reality of the global economic architecture. We should also improve governance rules for the new domains of deep sea, polar regions, outer space and cyberspace, so as to ensure that all countries share both rights and responsibilities.
第四，拓展金砖影响，构建广泛伙伴关系。作为具有全球影响力的合作平台，金砖合作的意义已超出五国范畴，承载着新兴市场国家和发展中国家乃至整个国际社会的期望。金砖国家奉行开放包容的合作理念，高度重视同其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家合作，建立起行之有效的对话机制。
Fourthly, we should increase the influence of BRICS and build extensive partnerships. As a cooperation platform with global influence, BRICS cooperation is more than about our five countries. Rather, it carries the expectations of emerging market and developing countries and indeed the international community. Guided by the principle of open and inclusive cooperation, we BRICS countries place high premium on cooperation with other emerging market and developing countries and have established effective dialogue mechanisms with them.
一箭易断，十箭难折。我们应该发挥自身优势和影响力，促进南南合作和南北对话，汇聚各国集体力量，联手应对风险挑战。我们应该扩大金砖合作的辐射和受益范围，推动“金砖+”合作模式，打造开放多元的发展伙伴网络，让更多新兴市场国家和发展中国家参与到团结合作、互利共赢的事业中来。
As a Chinese saying goes, "It is easy to break one arrow but hard to break ten arrows bundled together." We should leverage our respective strengths and influence, promote South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue, pool the collective strengths of all countries and jointly defuse risks and meet challenges. We should expand the coverage of BRICS cooperation and deliver its benefits to more people. We should promote the "BRICS Plus" cooperation approach and build an open and diversified network of development partnerships to get more emerging market and developing countries involved in our concerted endeavors for cooperation and mutual benefits.
厦门会晤期间，中方将举行新兴市场国家与发展中国家对话会，邀请来自全球不同地区国家的5位领导人共商国际发展合作和南南合作大计，推动落实2030年可持续发展议程。
During the Xiamen Summit, China will hold the Dialogue of Emerging Market and Developing Countries, where leaders of five countries from different regions will be invited to join the BRICS leaders in discussing global development cooperation and South-South cooperation as well as the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
无论是深化金砖自身合作，还是构建广泛的伙伴关系，人民相互了解、理解、友谊都是不可或缺的基石。我们应该发挥人文交流纽带作用，把各界人士汇聚到金砖合作事业中来，打造更多像文化节、电影节、运动会这样接地气、惠民生的活动，让金砖故事传遍大街小巷，让我们五国人民的交往和情谊汇成滔滔江河，为金砖合作注入绵绵不绝的动力。
Mutual understanding and friendship among peoples are crucial to enhancing BRICS cooperation and building extensive partnerships. We should fully leverage the role of people-to-people and cultural exchanges and encourage extensive public participation in BRICS cooperation. We should hold more events like cultural festivals, movie festivals and sports games that are popular among the people so that the BRICS story will be told everywhere and the exchanges and friendship of the peoples of our five countries will become an inexhaustible source of strength driving BRICS cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
金砖合作机制不断走深走实的10年，也是中国全面推进改革开放、经济社会实现快速发展的10年。10年中，中国经济总量增长239%，货物进出口总额增长73%，成为世界第二大经济体，13亿多中国人民的生活水平实现大幅飞跃，中国为世界和地区经济发展作出的贡献也越来越大。
The past decade has not only seen solid progress in the BRICS cooperation mechanism; it has also witnessed the unfolding of all-round reform and opening up in China and its rapid economic and social development. Over these ten years, China's economic aggregate has grown by 239% and its total volume of exports and imports in goods risen by 73%. China has become the world's second largest economy, the lives of its 1.3 billion-plus people have been significantly improved, and China has made increasingly greater contribution to both regional and global economic development.
不可否认的是，随着中国改革进入攻坚期和深水区，一些深层次的矛盾和问题凸显出来，需要下大决心、花大气力加以破解。中国有句话叫良药苦口。我们采用的是全面深化改革这剂良方。这5年来，我们采取了1500多项改革举措，推动改革呈现全面发力、多点突破、纵深推进的局面，经济结构调整和产业升级步伐不断加快，经济稳中向好态势不断巩固，经济持续发展的新动能不断积聚。今年上半年，中国经济增长6.9%，第三产业增加值占国内生产总值的54.1%，新增城镇就业735万人。事实证明，全面深化改革的路走对了，还要大步走下去。
It is true that as China's reform endeavors have entered a crucial stage where tough challenges must be met, some underlying difficulties and problems have surfaced, which must be addressed with resolve and determination. As a Chinese saying goes, "Effective medicine tastes bitter." The medicine that we have prescribed for ourselves is to carry out all-round reform. Over the past five years, we have adopted over 1,500 reform measures covering all sectors, with breakthroughs made in multiple areas, and the reform is being pursued with greater intensity. The pace of economic structural adjustment and industrial upgrading has accelerated. China's economy has maintained steady and sound performance, and new drivers sustaining development have grown in strength. In the first half of this year, China's economy grew by 6.9%, the value added from services accounted for 54.1% of the GDP, and 7.35 million urban jobs were created. All these achievements have proven that deepening all-round reform is the right path that we should continue to follow.
面向未来，中国将深入贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，不断适应、把握、引领经济发展新常态，推进供给侧结构性改革，加快构建开放型经济新体制，以创新引领经济发展，实现可持续发展。中国将坚定不移走和平发展道路，为世界和平与发展作出新的更大贡献。
Going forward, China will continue to put into practice the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development. We will adapt to and steer the new normal of economic development, push forward supply-side structural reform, accelerate the building of a new system for an open economy, drive economic development with innovation, and achieve sustainable development. China will stay firmly committed to peaceful development and make even greater contribution to global peace and development.
今年5月，中方成功主办“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛，29个国家的元首和政府首脑，140多个国家、80多个国际组织的1600多名代表出席，标志着共建“一带一路”倡议已经进入从理念到行动、从规划到实施的新阶段。各国代表在会上共商合作大计，共谋发展良策，达成广泛共识。需要指出的是，共建“一带一路”倡议不是地缘政治工具，而是务实合作平台；不是对外援助计划，而是共商共建共享的联动发展倡议。我相信，共建“一带一路”倡议将为各国实现合作共赢搭建起新的平台，为落实2030年可持续发展议程创造新的机遇。
Last May, China successfully hosted the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, which was attended by 29 heads of state or government and over 1,600 representatives from more than 140 countries and 80-plus international organizations. This ushered in a new stage of translating the Belt and Road Initiative from vision to action and from planning to implementation. Forum participants discussed ways of promoting cooperation and development and reached broad consensus. Let me make this clear: The Belt and Road Initiative is not a tool to advance any geopolitical agenda, but a platform for practical cooperation. It is not a foreign aid scheme, but an initiative for interconnected development which calls for extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. I am convinced that the Belt and Road Initiative will serve as a new platform for all countries to achieve win-win cooperation and that it will create new opportunities for implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
工商界是金砖国家经济发展的主力军。10年来，工商界人士将企业发展融入金砖合作，为构建金砖经济伙伴关系作出重要贡献。把工商论坛安排在领导人会晤前夕举行，就是为了听取工商界的意见和建议，共同把厦门会晤办好，把金砖合作建设好。希望你们发挥工商界在信息、技术、资金等方面的优势，开展更多互利共赢、利国利民的务实合作项目，为促进经济社会发展、增进人民福祉作出更大贡献。中国政府将继续鼓励中国企业到其他国家落地扎根，也热忱欢迎其他国家的企业来中国投资兴业。
The business community of the BRICS countries is the main force driving our economic development. Over the last decade, you have incorporated business development into BRICS cooperation, thus making important contribution to forging BRICS economic partnerships. The reason why we are holding the Business Forum on the eve of the Summit is to solicit your views and advice, so that we can work together to make the Xiamen Summit a success and enable BRICS cooperation to deliver. I hope you will leverage your strengths in terms of information, technology and funding to launch more practical and mutually beneficial cooperation projects that benefit our countries and peoples. What you do will help spur economic and social development and improve people's lives. The Chinese government will continue to encourage Chinese companies to operate and take root in other countries, and likewise, we also warmly welcome foreign companies to invest and operate in China.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
金砖国家将迎来更富活力的第二个十年，让我们同国际社会一道努力，让我们的合作成果惠及五国人民，让世界和平与发展的福祉惠及各国民众。
We BRICS countries will enter a second decade of more vibrant growth. Let us work together with other members of the international community. Let our cooperation deliver more benefits to the peoples of our five countries. Let the benefits of global peace and development reach all the people in the world.
最后，我预祝这次工商论坛取得圆满成功！
In conclusion, I wish the Business Forum every success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you!