14. 习近平在中非团结抗疫特别峰会上的主旨讲话
团结抗疫　共克时艰
Defeating COVID-19 with Solidarity and Cooperation
——在中非团结抗疫特别峰会上的主旨讲话
（2020年6月17日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Extraordinary China-Africa Summit
On Solidarity Against COVID-19
Beijing, 17 June 2020
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的萨勒总统，
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑，
尊敬的非洲联盟委员会主席法基先生，
尊敬的联合国秘书长古特雷斯先生，
尊敬的世界卫生组织总干事谭德塞先生，
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa,
Your Excellency President Macky Sall,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellency Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Your Excellency António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Your Excellency Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization,
在全球抗击新冠肺炎疫情的重要时刻，我们举行这次中非特别峰会，同各位新老朋友通过视频相聚，共商团结抗疫大计，共叙中非兄弟情谊。感谢拉马福萨总统、萨勒总统同我一道倡议举办这次会议，感谢各位同事出席会议。我也向未出席会议的非洲各国领导人表示诚挚的问候！
At such a critical moment in the global fight against COVID-19, we are gathered together in this Extraordinary China-Africa Summit. Friends old and new are connected via video link to discuss our joint response to COVID-19 and to renew the fraternity between China and Africa. I thank President Ramaphosa and President Sall for joining me in initiating the Summit, and I appreciate the participation of all colleagues present. I also want to send my regards to other African leaders who are not able to be with us today.
这次疫情突如其来，给世界各国带来严重冲击，夺走数十万人宝贵生命。在此，我提议，我们为在疫情中的不幸罹难者默哀，向他们的亲人表示慰问。
The sudden onslaught of COVID-19 has taken a heavy toll on countries around the world, with the loss of several hundred thousand precious lives. Here, I suggest that we observe a moment of silence for those who have tragically passed away due to COVID-19 and express our condolences to their families.
——面对疫情，中国和非洲经受了严峻考验。中国人民经过艰苦卓绝努力，付出巨大代价，控制住国内疫情，但仍面临反弹压力。非洲各国政府和人民众志成城，非洲联盟全力协调，采取有力举措，有效缓解了疫情，成果来之不易。
— In the face of COVID-19, China and Africa have withstood the test of a severe challenge. The Chinese people have put up a fierce fight and made enormous sacrifice to bring the situation in China under control. Still, we remain mindful of the risk of a resurgence. In the same spirit, governments and peoples in Africa have put up a united front and, under the effective coordination by the African Union, have taken strong measures to effectively slow the spread of the virus. These are indeed hard-won results.
——面对疫情，中国和非洲相互声援、并肩战斗。在中国抗疫最艰难的时刻，非洲送来宝贵支持，我们铭记于心。非洲疫情暴发后，中国率先驰援，同非洲人民坚定站在一起。
— In the face of COVID-19, China and Africa have offered mutual support and fought shoulder to shoulder with each other. China shall always remember the invaluable support Africa gave us at the height of our battle with the coronavirus. In return, when Africa was struck by the virus, China was the first to rush in with assistance and has since stood firm with the African people.
——面对疫情，中非双方更加团结，友好互信更加巩固。我愿重申，中方珍视中非传统友谊，无论国际风云如何变幻，中方加强中非团结合作的决心绝不会动摇。
— In the face of COVID-19, China and Africa have enhanced solidarity and strengthened friendship and mutual trust. Let me reaffirm China’s commitment to its longstanding friendship with Africa. No matter how the international landscape may evolve, China shall never waver in its determination to pursue greater solidarity and cooperation with Africa.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
当前，疫情仍在全球蔓延，中国和非洲都面临抗疫情、稳经济、保民生的艰巨任务。我们要坚持人民至上、生命至上，统筹资源，团结合作，尽最大努力保护人民生命安全和身体健康，最大限度降低疫情负面影响。
COVID-19 is still affecting many parts of the world. Both China and Africa face the formidable task of combating the virus while stabilizing the economy and protecting people’s livelihoods. We must always put our people and their lives front and center. We must mobilize necessary resources, stick together in collaboration, and do whatever it takes to protect people’s lives and health and minimize the fallout of COVID-19.
第一，我们要坚定不移携手抗击疫情。中方将继续全力支持非方抗疫行动，抓紧落实我在世界卫生大会开幕式上宣布的举措，继续向非洲国家提供物资援助、派遣医疗专家组、协助非方来华采购抗疫物资。中方将提前于年内开工建设非洲疾控中心总部，同非方一道实施好中非合作论坛框架内“健康卫生行动”，加快中非友好医院建设和中非对口医院合作，共同打造中非卫生健康共同体。中方承诺，新冠疫苗研发完成并投入使用后，愿率先惠及非洲国家。
First, we must stay committed to fighting COVID-19 together. China will continue to do whatever it can to support Africa’s response to COVID-19. China will lose no time in following through on the measures I announced at the opening of the World Health Assembly, and continue to help African countries by providing supplies, sending expert teams, and facilitating Africa’s procurement of medical supplies in China. China will start ahead of schedule the construction of the Africa CDC headquarters this year. China will work with Africa to fully deliver the health care initiative adopted at the FOCAC Beijing Summit, and speed up the construction of China-Africa Friendship Hospitals and the cooperation between paired-up Chinese and African hospitals. Together, we will build a China-Africa community of health for all. We pledge that once the development and deployment of COVID-19 vaccine is completed in China, African countries will be among the first to benefit.
第二，我们要坚定不移推进中非合作。为克服疫情带来的冲击，我们要加强共建“一带一路”合作，加快落实中非合作论坛北京峰会成果，并将合作重点向健康卫生、复工复产、改善民生领域倾斜。
Second, we must stay committed to enhancing China-Africa cooperation. To cushion the impact of COVID-19, it is important to strengthen Belt and Road cooperation and accelerate the follow-ups to the FOCAC Beijing Summit. Greater priority needs to be given to cooperation on public health, economic reopening, and people’s livelihood.
中方将在中非合作论坛框架下免除有关非洲国家截至2020年底到期对华无息贷款债务。中方愿同国际社会一道，加大对疫情特别重、压力特别大的非洲国家的支持力度，包括进一步延长缓债期限，帮助其克服当前困难。中方鼓励中国有关金融机构参照二十国集团缓债倡议，根据市场原则同非洲国家就商业主权贷款安排进行友好协商。中方将同二十国集团成员一道落实二十国集团缓债倡议，并呼吁二十国集团在落实当前缓债倡议基础上，进一步延长对包括非洲国家在内的相关国家缓债期限。
Within the FOCAC framework, China will cancel the debt of relevant African countries in the form of interest-free government loans that are due to mature by the end of 2020. For those African countries that are hardest hit by the coronavirus and are under heavy financial stress, China will work with the global community to give them greater support, by such means as further extending the period of debt suspension, to help them tide over the current difficulty. We encourage Chinese financial institutions to respond to the G20’s Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) and to hold friendly consultations with African countries according to market principles to work out arrangements for commercial loans with sovereign guarantees. China will work with other members of the G20 to implement the DSSI and, on that basis, urge the G20 to extend debt service suspension still further for countries concerned, including those in Africa.
中方希望国际社会特别是发达国家和多边金融机构在非洲减缓债问题上采取更有力行动。中方愿在尊重非方意愿基础上，同联合国、世界卫生组织及其他伙伴开展援非抗疫合作。
China hopes that the international community, especially developed countries and multilateral financial institutions, will act more forcefully on debt relief and suspension for Africa. China will work with the UN, WHO and other partners to assist Africa’s response to COVID-19, and do it in a way that respects the will of Africa.
推动非洲实现可持续发展是长远之道。中方支持非洲大陆自由贸易区建设，支持非洲加强互联互通和保障产业链供应链建设，愿同非方一道，共同拓展数字经济、智慧城市、清洁能源、5G等新业态合作，促进非洲发展振兴。
To help Africa achieve sustainable development is what matters in the long run. China supports Africa in its effort to develop the African Continental Free Trade Area and to enhance connectivity and strengthen industrial and supply chains. China will explore broader cooperation with Africa in such new business forms as digital economy, smart city, clean energy, and 5G to boost Africa’s development and revitalization.
第三，我们要坚定不移践行多边主义。团结合作是抗击疫情最有力的武器。中方愿同非方一道，维护以联合国为核心的全球治理体系，支持世卫组织为全球抗疫作出更大贡献。我们反对将疫情政治化、病毒标签化，反对种族歧视和意识形态偏见，坚定捍卫国际公平正义。
Third, we must stay committed to upholding multilateralism. In the face of COVID-19, solidarity and cooperation is our most powerful weapon. China will work with Africa to uphold the UN-centered global governance system and support WHO in making greater contribution to the global COVID-19 response. We oppose politicization and stigmatization of COVID-19, and we oppose racial discrimination and ideological bias. We stand firm for equity and justice in the world.
第四，我们要坚定不移推进中非友好。当今世界正经历百年未有之大变局。面对新的机遇和挑战，中非比以往任何时候都更加需要加强合作。我愿同各位同事保持密切联系，夯实友好互信，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互支持，共同维护中非和发展中国家根本利益，推进中非全面战略合作伙伴关系高水平发展。
Fourth, we must stay committed to taking China-Africa friendship forward. The world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century. Given the new opportunities and challenges we face, closer cooperation between China and Africa is needed, more than ever. On my part, I will stay in close touch with all of you, my colleagues, to consolidate our friendship and mutual trust, support each other on issues involving our respective core interests, and advance the fundamental interests of China and Africa and, for that matter, of all developing countries. This way, we will be able to take the China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership to a greater height.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
我们在中非合作论坛北京峰会上一致决定构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体。今天我们召开团结抗疫特别峰会，就是用实际行动践行北京峰会承诺，也是为国际抗疫合作贡献力量。我相信，人类终将战胜疫情，中非人民也终将过上更加美好的生活。
At the FOCAC Beijing Summit, we agreed to work together to build an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future. Today’s Extraordinary China-Africa Summit on Solidarity against COVID-19 is our concrete step to deliver the commitment we made at the Beijing Summit and to do our part in the international cooperation against COVID-19. I am convinced that humanity will ultimately defeat the virus, and that the Chinese and African people are poised to embrace better days ahead.
谢谢。
Thank you.
