7. 习近平在金砖国家领导人第十二次会晤上的讲话
守望相助共克疫情　携手同心推进合作
Fighting COVID-19 in Solidarity and
Advancing BRICS Cooperation Through Concerted Efforts
——在金砖国家领导人第十二次会晤上的讲话
（2020年11月17日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the 12th BRICS Summit
Beijing, 17 November 2020
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的博索纳罗总统：
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa,
Your Excellency President Jair Bolsonaro,
首先，感谢普京总统和俄罗斯政府为这次金砖国家领导人会晤所做精心安排。当前，世纪疫情和百年变局交织，国际格局深刻演变。在这样一个重要时刻，我们举行这次会晤，共商抗疫合作大计，共绘金砖发展蓝图，具有特殊重要意义。
I wish to begin by thanking President Putin and the Russian government for their thoughtful organization of this BRICS Summit. Right now, the world is caught between a pandemic of the century and momentous changes never seen in the last one hundred years. The international landscape keeps evolving in profound ways. At such a critical moment, we are meeting to discuss our joint response to COVID-19 and draw a blueprint for the future of BRICS. The meeting has thus taken on a special significance.
环顾全球，疫情使各国人民生命安全和身体健康遭受巨大威胁，全球公共卫生体系面临严峻考验，人类社会正在经历百年来最严重的传染病大流行。国际贸易和投资急剧萎缩，人员、货物流动严重受阻，不稳定不确定因素层出不穷，世界经济正在经历上世纪30年代大萧条以来最严重的衰退。单边主义、保护主义、霸凌行径愈演愈烈，治理赤字、信任赤字、发展赤字、和平赤字有增无减。
Around the world, COVID-19 is posing a grave threat to people’s life and well-being. The global public health system is facing a severe test. Human society is going through the most serious pandemic in the past century. International trade and investment have shrunk considerably. The flow of goods and personnel has been impeded. Factors for uncertainty and instability are numerous. The world economy is witnessing the worst recession since the Great Depression in the 1930s. Unilateralism, protectionism and acts of bullying are becoming rampant, and the deficit in governance, trust, development and peace is widening instead of narrowing.
同时，我们坚信，和平与发展的时代主题没有改变，世界多极化和经济全球化的时代潮流也不可能逆转。我们要为人民福祉着想，秉持人类命运共同体理念，用实际行动为建设美好世界作出应有贡献。
Despite all this, we remain convinced that the theme of our times, peace and development, has not changed, and that the trend toward multipolarity and economic globalization cannot be turned around. We must keep people’s welfare close to heart and pursue the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind. Through concrete actions, we will contribute our share to making the world a better place for everyone.
——我们要坚持多边主义，维护世界和平稳定。历史昭示我们，恪守多边主义，追求公平正义，战乱冲突可以避免；搞单边主义、强权政治，纷争对抗将愈演愈烈。如果无视规则和法治，继续大搞单边霸凌、“退群毁约”，不仅违背世界人民普遍愿望，也是对各国正当权利和尊严的践踏。
First, we need to uphold multilateralism, and safeguard peace and stability in our world. History teaches us that multilateralism, equity and justice can keep war and conflict at bay, while unilateralism and power politics will inflate dispute and confrontation. Flouting rules and laws, treading the path of unilateralism and bullying, and withdrawing from international organizations and agreements run counter to the will of the general public and trample on the legitimate rights and dignity of all nations.
面对多边和单边、公道和霸道之争，金砖国家要坚定维护国际公平正义，高举多边主义旗帜，捍卫联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序。各国应该超越意识形态，尊重彼此根据自身国情选择的社会制度、经济模式、发展道路。要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，通过协商和谈判化解分歧，反对干涉内政，反对单边制裁和“长臂管辖”，共同营造和平稳定的发展环境。
Facing the choice between multilateralism and unilateralism, and between justice and hegemony, we BRICS countries must stand up for equity and justice in the world. We must hold high the banner of multilateralism, and defend the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We must endeavor to safeguard the UN-centered international system and the international order underpinned by international law. It is important that countries rise above ideology and respect each other’s choices of social system, economic model and development path consistent with their national conditions. We need to champion the concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We need to work through consultation and negotiation to address differences. We need to oppose interference in others’ internal affairs, as well as unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction. With concerted efforts, we will foster a peaceful and stable environment for development.
——我们要坚持团结协作，合力克服疫情挑战。当前，病毒仍在全球肆虐，疫情还在不断反复，夺取全球抗疫胜利仍需付出艰苦努力。经过近一年的抗疫斗争，许多国家在疫情防控方面积累了宝贵经验，在药物和疫苗研发上取得了显著进展。近一年的抗疫实践证明，只要团结一心、科学防治，病毒传播可以控制，疫情影响能够克服。
Second, we need to enhance solidarity and coordination, and come together to meet the COVID-19 challenge. The coronavirus is still causing havoc in many places and waves of infection are resurging. Securing a worldwide victory against the pandemic remains an uphill journey. Nearly one year into the battle, many countries have gained important experience on COVID-19 containment and made encouraging progress in drugs and vaccine research and development (R&D). Our fight over the past year proves that as long as we stand in unity and follow science, we can control the spread of the virus and offset its impact.
我们要坚持人民至上、生命至上，调集一切资源、尽一切努力保护人民生命安全和身体健康。要加强国际联防联控，分享疫情信息，交流抗疫经验，遏制病毒传播。要支持世界卫生组织发挥关键领导作用。中国企业正在同俄罗斯、巴西伙伴合作开展疫苗三期临床试验，我们也愿同南非、印度开展有关合作。中方已经加入“新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”，将在这个平台上同各国特别是其他发展中国家分享疫苗。我们愿积极考虑向有需要的金砖国家提供疫苗。为推动金砖国家疫苗研发中心建设，中方已经设立疫苗研发中国中心，愿通过线上线下相结合方式，推进五国疫苗联合研发和试验、合作建厂、授权生产、标准互认等工作。我倡议五国召开传统医药研讨会，探索传统医药在新冠肺炎防治方面的作用，为全球疫情防控增添有力武器。
What is important is that we put people’s life and health first, mobilize all resources and do everything we can to protect people’s safety and well-being. It is important to step up international coordination and response, and share information and epidemic control experience to stop the virus in its tracks. It is important that we support WHO’s crucial leadership role in this endeavor. As we speak, Chinese companies are working with their Russian and Brazilian partners on phase-III clinical trials of vaccines, and we are prepared to have cooperation with South Africa and India as well. China has joined the COVAX facility, a platform on which we will share vaccines with other countries, developing countries in particular. We will actively consider providing vaccines to BRICS countries where there is a need. To support the development of the BRICS Vaccine R&D Center, China has designated its own national center. We will work with other BRICS countries both online and offline to advance collective vaccine research and trials, set up plants, authorize production and recognize each other’s standards. I propose that we convene a BRICS symposium on traditional medicine to explore its role in coronavirus prevention and treatment. This may well boost the global arsenal against COVID-19.
事实证明，将疫情政治化、污名化，搞“甩锅”、推责，干扰的是全球合作抗疫大局。我们要推动以团结取代分歧，以理性消除偏见，扫除“政治病毒”，凝聚起各国携手抗疫的最大合力。
What has happened shows that acts of politicization, stigmatization, blame-shifting and scapegoating only serve to disrupt overall global cooperation against the virus. We need to overcome division with unity, replace bias with reason and stamp out the “political virus”. In this way, we will pool the maximum global synergy to beat the virus.
——我们要坚持开放创新，促进世界经济复苏。根据国际货币基金组织预测，今年世界经济将萎缩4.4%，新兴市场国家和发展中国家将经历60年来首次负增长。一手防疫情，一手稳经济，是各国刻不容缓的任务。我们要在确保安全前提下，积极推进经济复苏，在疫情防控常态化中实现经济社会活动有序开展。要加强宏观经济政策协调，推动落实“人员与货物跨境流动便利化倡议”，保障产业链、供应链安全畅通，助力各国复工复产、恢复经济。
Third, we need to pursue openness and innovation, and promote global economic recovery. The IMF predicts that the world economy will shrink by 4.4 percent this year, and that emerging markets and developing countries will experience negative growth for the first time in 60 years. To stabilize the economy while controlling the pandemic is the pressing task facing all countries. Under the precondition that safety is ensured, we must actively pursue economic recovery and seek to carry out economic and social activities in an orderly way as we fight the virus on an ongoing basis. We need to strengthen macroeconomic policy coordination, follow through on the initiative on facilitating cross-border flow of people and goods, and keep industrial and supply chains safe and open to better enable the resumption of business activities and economic recovery.
利用疫情搞“去全球化”，鼓吹所谓“经济脱钩”、“平行体系”，最终只会损害本国和各国共同利益。当前形势下，我们要坚定不移构建开放型世界经济，维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，反对滥用国家安全之名行保护主义之实。要利用好疫情催生的新业态新模式，加强科技创新合作，营造开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境，共同实现更高质量、更具韧性的发展。
The practice of using the pandemic to pursue “de-globalization” or clamor for “economic decoupling” and “parallel systems” will end up hurting one’s own interests and the common interests of all. Under the current situation, we need to stand firm for building an open world economy. We need to uphold the multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core and reject abuse of the “national security” concept for protectionist purposes. We need to leverage the new business forms and models triggered by the pandemic, strengthen cooperation on scientific and technological innovation, and nurture an open, fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory business environment to bring about common development of higher quality and stronger resilience.
中方愿同各方一道加快建设金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系。我们将在福建省厦门市建立金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系创新基地，开展政策协调、人才培养、项目开发等领域合作，欢迎金砖国家积极参与。近期，中方发起了《全球数据安全倡议》，推动共建和平、安全、开放、合作、有序的网络空间，促进数字经济健康发展，希望得到金砖国家支持。
China will work with other parties to flesh out the BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution at a faster pace. We will open in Xiamen, Fujian Province a BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution innovation center to advance cooperation on policy coordination, personnel training and project development, and we welcome the active participation of fellow BRICS countries. Not long ago, China launched a Global Initiative on Data Security, which aims to jointly foster a peaceful, secure, open, cooperative and orderly cyberspace to enable sound growth of the digital economy. We look forward to support from our fellow BRICS countries.
——我们要坚持民生优先，推进全球可持续发展。发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。无论是消除疫情影响、重回生活正轨，还是平息冲突动乱、解决人道主义危机，根本上都要靠以人民为中心的发展。世界银行预测，2020年全球人均收入将下降3.6%，8800万至1.15亿人将因疫情陷入极端贫困。
Fourth, we need to prioritize people’s livelihood, and promote sustainable global development. Development holds the master key to all problems. All our efforts, from clearing the impact of COVID-19 and getting back to a normal life, to ending conflicts and humanitarian crises, ultimately depend on people-centered development. According to World Bank forecast, global per capita income might drop 3.6 percent this year, and some 88 million to 115 million people might be pushed into extreme poverty due to the pandemic.
我们要直面疫情挑战，推动国际社会将落实《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》置于国际发展合作核心，将消除贫困作为首要目标，让资源更多向减贫、教育、卫生、基础设施建设等领域倾斜。要支持联合国发挥统筹协调作用，推动构建更加平等均衡的全球发展伙伴关系，让发展成果更多惠及发展中国家，更好满足弱势群体需求。
COVID-19 is a challenge we have to face head-on. We need to call on the international community to place the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the heart of international development cooperation. Poverty eradication must be made a primary goal, and more resources must be channeled to poverty reduction, education, health and infrastructure development. We need to support the UN’s coordinating role and foster global development partnerships that are more equal and balanced, so that the fruits of development will spread to more developing countries and the needs of underprivileged groups will be better addressed.
——我们要坚持绿色低碳，促进人与自然和谐共生。全球变暖不会因疫情停下脚步，应对气候变化一刻也不能松懈。我们要落实好应对气候变化《巴黎协定》，恪守共同但有区别的责任原则，为发展中国家特别是小岛屿国家提供更多帮助。中国愿承担与自身发展水平相称的国际责任，继续为应对气候变化付出艰苦努力。我不久前在联合国宣布，中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更有力的政策和举措，二氧化碳排放力争于2030年前达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和。我们将说到做到！
Fifth, we need to pursue green and low-carbon development, and strive for harmony between man and nature. Global warming will not stop due to COVID-19. To tackle climate change, we must never relax our efforts. We need to implement the Paris Agreement in good faith, stick to the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, and provide more help to developing countries, particularly the small island developing states. China is prepared to take on international responsibilities befitting its level of development, and will continue to make extraordinary efforts to address climate change. Recently, I announced at the UN China’s initiative to scale up its nationally determined contributions and adopt more forceful policies and measures to strive to peak carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. You can count on China to keep its promise.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。我们将下大气力扩大内需，全面深化改革，推动科技创新，为国内经济发展增添动力。中国开放的大门不会关闭，只会越开越大。我们将更加积极地融入全球市场，更加主动地深化对外合作，为世界经济复苏发展创造更多机遇和空间。
The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. We will redouble efforts to expand domestic demand, deepen reform across the board and promote innovation in science and technology to add impetus to China’s economic growth. China will not shut its door of opening-up; it will embrace the world with more open arms. China will be more vigorous in integrating with the global market and will take greater initiative in deepening international cooperation. In so doing, China will create more opportunities and space for global recovery and growth.
我们都在同一艘船上。风高浪急之时，我们更要把准方向，掌握好节奏，团结合作，乘风破浪，行稳致远，驶向更加美好的明天。
All of us are indeed passengers in the same boat. When the wind is strong and the tides are high, we must be even more focused on our direction. We must keep pace and work as a team to break the waves and navigate steadily toward a brighter future.
谢谢。
Thank you.
