61. 习近平主席在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的主旨演讲
抓住世界经济转型机遇 谋求亚太更大发展
——在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的主旨演讲
（2017年11月10日，岘港）
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
Seizing the Opportunity of a Global Economy in Transition
And Accelerating Development of the Asia-Pacific
Keynote Address by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the APEC CEO Summit
Da Nang, 10 November 2017
武进禄主席先生，
亚太工商界各位代表，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Chairman Vu Tien Loc,
Leaders of the APEC Business Community,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
大家好！很高兴来到岘港，再次同亚太工商界的朋友见面。	
Good afternoon! I am glad to come to Da Nang and meet all of you again.
亚太是全球经济最大的板块，也是世界经济增长的一个主要引擎。工商界是促进经济增长的生力军，是新发展理念的探索者、实践者。这几年，每次出席亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，我都抽出时间同工商界的朋友见面，共同探讨应对当前挑战的思路和举措。
Our region, the Asia-Pacific, has the biggest share of the global economy; and it is a major engine driving global growth. The business community is a primary contributor to growth, as it keeps exploring new ways of development. That's why during the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting over the last several years, I have always taken time to meet business leaders and discuss with you approaches and measures to address the challenges we face.
国际金融危机发生10年来，国际社会一起努力，推动世界经济逐步回到复苏的轨道。今天，我们迎来了世界经济逐步向好的局面。尽管仍然面临风险和不确定性，但全球贸易和投资回暖，金融市场预期向好，各方信心显著增强。	
It has been 10 years since the international financial crisis broke out. Over the last decade, the international community have worked in concert to steer the global economy back to the track of recovery. Thanks to our efforts, the global economy is improving. Despite risks and uncertainties, global trade and investment are picking up, people are more optimistic about the outlook of financial markets, and confidence is growing in all sectors.
发展之路没有终点，只有新的起点。“往者不可谏，来者犹可追。”世界正处在快速变化的历史进程之中，世界经济正在发生更深层次的变化。我们要洞察世界经济发展趋势，找准方位，把握规律，果敢应对。	
Development is a journey with no end, but with one new departure point after another. An ancient Chinese philosopher once observed, "We should focus our mind on the future, not the past." We live in a fast changing world, and the global economy is undergoing more profound changes. We must therefore closely follow the trend of the global economy, identify its underlying dynamics, keep to the right direction, and, on that basis, take bold action.
——我们正面临增长动能的深刻转变。当前，改革创新成为各国化解挑战、谋求发展的方向。结构性改革的正面效应和潜能持续释放，对各国经济增长的促进作用进一步显现。新一轮科技和产业革命形成势头，数字经济、共享经济加速发展，新产业、新模式、新业态层出不穷，新的增长动能不断积聚。	
-- We are seeing a profound change in growth drivers. Countries are turning to reform and innovation to meet challenges and achieve growth. The potential of structural reforms is being unlocked and its positive impact of boosting growth of various countries has become more evident. A new round of technological and industrial revolutions is gaining momentum. Digital economy and sharing economy have registered rapid growth. New industries as well as new forms and models of business are flourishing. As a result, new growth drivers are being created.
——我们正面临全球发展方式的深刻转变。随着时代进步，发展的内涵正在发生深刻变化。创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念日益深入人心，实现更加全面、更有质量、更可持续的发展，是国际社会共同追求的目标。落实2030年可持续发展议程，应对气候变化等全球性挑战，成为国际社会重要共识。	
-- We are seeing a profound change in the model of global growth. As time advances, development has taken on profoundly richer implications. The vision of innovative, coordinated, green and open development for all is gaining increasing public support. To achieve more comprehensive, higher quality and more sustainable development has become the shared goal of the international community. To implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and adapt to climate change and other challenges of a global nature has become an important international consensus.
——我们正面临经济全球化进程的深刻转变。过去数十年，经济全球化对世界经济发展作出了重要贡献，已成为不可逆转的时代潮流。同时，面对形势的发展变化，经济全球化在形式和内容上面临新的调整，理念上应该更加注重开放包容，方向上应该更加注重普惠平衡，效应上应该更加注重公正共赢。
-- We are seeing a profound change in economic globalization. Over the last few decades, economic globalization has contributed greatly to global growth. Indeed, it has become an irreversible historical trend. Against the backdrop of evolving global developments, economic globalization faces new adjustments in both form and substance. In pursuing economic globalization, we should make it more open and inclusive, more balanced, more equitable and beneficial to all.
——我们正面临全球经济治理体系的深刻转变。世界经济格局的演变对全球经济治理体系提出了更高要求。坚持多边主义，谋求共商共建共享，建立紧密伙伴关系，构建人类命运共同体，是新形势下全球经济治理的必然趋势。
-- We are seeing a profound change in the system of global economic governance. The evolving global economic environment demands more from the system of global economic governance. We should uphold multilateralism, pursue shared growth through consultation and collaboration, forge closer partnerships, and build a community with a shared future for mankind. This, I believe, is what we should do in conducting global economic governance in a new era.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
面对世界经济的深刻转变，亚太在改革创新大潮中是勇立潮头，还是迟疑徘徊？是主动引导经济全球化继续前行，还是在挑战面前犹豫不定？是携手开辟区域合作新局面，还是各自渐行渐远？
Faced with the profound changes in the global economy, should we, the Asia-Pacific economies, lead reform and innovation, or just hesitate and proceed haltingly? Should we steer economic globalization, or dither and stall in the face of challenge? Should we jointly advance regional cooperation, or go our separate ways?
答案是清楚的，我们必须顺应大势，勇于担当，共同开辟亚太发展繁荣的光明未来。	
This is my answer: We must advance with the trend of times, live up to our responsibility and work together to deliver a bright future of development and prosperity for the Asia-Pacific.
第一，继续坚持建设开放型经济，努力实现互利共赢。开放带来进步，封闭必然落后。亚太经济体通过自身发展实践，对这一点有着深刻体会。我们要努力打造平等协商、广泛参与、普遍受益的区域合作框架，合力构建开放型亚太经济，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化。我们要引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展，造福不同国家、不同阶层、不同人群。我们要主动适应全球产业分工调整变化，积极引领全球价值链重塑，确立新定位，构筑新优势。我们要支持多边贸易体制，坚持开放的区域主义，帮助发展中成员更多从国际贸易和投资中受益。	
First, we should continue to foster an open economy that benefits all. Openness brings progress, while self-seclusion leaves one behind. We the Asia-Pacific economies know this too well from our own development experience. We should put in place a regional cooperation framework that ensures consultation among equals, wide participation and shared benefits, build an open Asia-Pacific economy and promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation. We should make economic globalization more open, inclusive and balanced so that it benefits different countries and people of different social groups. We should proactively adapt to the evolving international division of labor and actively reshape the global value chain so as to upgrade our economies and build up new strengths. We should support the multilateral trading regime and practice open regionalism to make developing members benefit more from international trade and investment.
建成亚太自由贸易区是亚太工商界多年的梦想。2006年，正是在工商界呼吁下，亚太经合组织成员领导人在河内首次把建设亚太自由贸易区确立为远景目标。2014年，我们在北京启动亚太自由贸易区进程。我们应该行动起来，全面深入落实北京路线图，向着建成亚太自由贸易区的目标不断迈进，为开放型亚太经济提供机制保障。	
The building of a free trade area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) is the long-cherished dream of the business community in our region. It was in response to the call of the business community that APEC leaders, for the first time, initiated the FTAAP vision in Hanoi in 2006. In 2014, the FTAAP process was launched in Beijing. We should get into action, fully implement the Beijing Roadmap, move toward the FTAAP and provide an institutional underpinning for growing an open economy in the Asia-Pacific.
第二，继续谋求创新增长，挖掘发展新动能。当前，世界经济回稳，周期性因素发挥了很大的作用，内生动能不足的顽疾并未消除。世界经济彻底摆脱“新平庸”的风险，只能向创新要动力。	
Second, we should continue to pursue innovation-driven development and create new drivers of growth. The current global economic recovery is, to a large extent, the result of cyclical factors, while the lack of self-generating driving forces remains a nagging problem. To avoid the risk of the global economy entering a "new mediocre", we must sustain growth through innovation.
我们正迎来新一轮科技和产业革命，数字经济、共享经济在全球范围内掀起浪潮，人工智能、量子科学等新技术不断取得突破，亚太不能等待和观望。我们应该抢抓机遇，加大创新投入，转变发展方式，培育新的经济增长点。要积极推进结构性改革，消除一切不利于创新的体制机制障碍，激发市场活力。要落实好北京会议《经济创新发展、改革与增长共识》，深化互联网和数字经济合作，引领全球创新发展的方向。	
The new round of technological and industrial revolutions is unfolding before us. Digital economy and sharing economy are surging worldwide, and breakthroughs have been made in new technologies such as artificial intelligence and quantum science. We in the Asia-Pacific cannot afford to be just onlookers. What we should do is to seize the opportunity, increase input in innovation, change the model of development and nurture new growth areas. We should promote structural reform, remove all institutional and systemic barriers to innovation and energize the market. We should implement the APEC Accord on Innovative Development, Economic Reform and Growth adopted in Beijing, deepen cooperation on the internet and digital economy and strive to be a global leader of innovative growth.
第三，继续加强互联互通，实现联动发展。联动发展是对互利共赢理念的最好诠释。亚太经济体利益交融，联系紧密。坚持联动发展，既能为伙伴提供发展动力，也能为自身创造更大发展空间。2014年，我们制定完成了亚太经合组织互联互通蓝图。我们要以蓝图为指引，建立全方位、多层次、复合型的亚太互联互通网络。要充分发挥互联互通对实体经济的辐射和带动作用，打破发展瓶颈，释放发展潜力，形成协调联动发展的格局。	
Third, we should continue to enhance connectivity and achieve interconnected development. Interconnected development is the best way to achieve mutual benefit and win-win outcome. We the Asia-Pacific economies are closely connected, and our interests are interlocked. Such an interconnected development will both open up new horizon for our own development, and create driving force for us all to achieve common development as partners. In 2014, the APEC Connectivity Blueprint was formulated. This Blueprint should guide our efforts to build a comprehensive, all-round and multi-tiered Asia-Pacific connectivity network. We should boost the real economy through the building of connectivity, break bottlenecks to development and unlock potentials. With these efforts, we can achieve coordinated and interconnected development.
今年5月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举办。共建“一带一路”倡议的核心内涵，就是促进基础设施建设和互联互通，加强经济政策协调和发展战略对接，促进协同联动发展，实现共同繁荣。这一倡议源自中国，更属于世界；根植于历史，更面向未来；重点面向亚欧非大陆，更向所有伙伴开放。我相信，共建“一带一路”倡议的深入推进，将为亚太各方提供更加广阔、更有活力的合作平台！	
In May this year, the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was successfully held in Beijing. The Belt and Road Initiative calls for joint contribution and it has a clear focus, which is to promote infrastructure construction and connectivity, strengthen coordination on economic policies, enhance complementarity of development strategies and boost interconnected development to achieve common prosperity. This initiative is from China, but it belongs to the world. It is rooted in history, but it is oriented toward the future. It focuses on the Asian, European and African continents, but it is open to all partners. I am confident that the launch of the Belt and Road Initiative will create a broader and more dynamic platform for Asia-Pacific cooperation.
第四，继续增强经济发展包容性，让民众共享发展成果。当前，经济全球化进程遭遇逆风，一个重要原因是发展的包容性不足。让不同国家、不同阶层都能享受发展红利，让美好的愿景变为现实，仍需要作出不懈努力。	
Fourth, we should continue to make economic development more inclusive and deliver its benefits to our people. The current headwinds confronting economic globalization is mostly generated by the lack of inclusiveness in development. Hard work is still needed if we are to bring the benefits of development to countries across the globe and people across our society, and thus turn our vision into reality.
过去几年，我们围绕包容发展进行了积极探索，有了坚实的共识基础。我们要结合区域经济一体化的深入推进，做大开放普惠的市场，做强利益共享的链条。我们要把包容共享理念融入发展战略，努力健全讲求效率、注重公平的体制机制，维护社会公平正义。我们要在教育、医疗、就业等民生领域加大投入，解决好贫困、收入差距拉大等问题。我们要加大对弱势群体的扶持力度，改善中小微企业发展环境，增强劳动者适应产业变革的能力，让人人拥有机遇，享有成果！	
Over the past few years, we have actively explored ways to promote inclusive development and have built strong consensus about it. We should deepen regional economic integration, develop an open and inclusive market and strengthen the bond of shared interests. We should make inclusiveness and sharing a part of our development strategies, improve systems and institutions to uphold efficiency and fairness, and safeguard social equity and justice. We should invest more in education, medical care, employment and other areas that are important to people's livelihood, and address poverty and the widening gap between the rich and the poor. We should reach out to disadvantaged groups, improve business environment for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, and enable the workforce to better adapt to industrial transformation, so that everyone will have his fair share of opportunity and benefits.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国古人说：“口言之，身必行之。”实现亚太更大发展，需要每个成员脚踏实地拿出行动。作为全球第二大经济体，中国深知自身肩负的责任。过去5年，我们主动适应、把握、引领经济新常态，深入推进供给侧结构性改革，保持经济稳中向好、稳中有进，推动中国发展不断向着更高质量、更有效率、更加公平、更可持续的方向迈进。过去4年，中国经济平均增长率为7.2%，对世界经济增长的平均贡献率超过30%，成为世界经济的主要动力源。	
As an old Chinese saying goes, a commitment, once made, should be delivered. Boosting development in the Asia-Pacific requires real actions by all of us members. As the world's second largest economy, China knows fully well its responsibility. Over the past five years, we have taken proactive steps to adapt to, manage and steer the new normal of China's economy and deepened supply-side structural reform. As a result, China's economy has maintained steady performance, and we are pursuing better-quality, more efficient, fairer and more sustainable development. Over the past four years, China's economy has grown by 7.2% on the average annually, contributing over 30% of global growth. China is now a main driver powering global growth.
我们通过全面深化改革破除妨碍发展的体制机制障碍，推出360个重大改革方案、1500多项改革举措，一批重要领域和关键环节改革取得突破性进展，主要领域改革主体框架基本确立。我们加快构建开放型经济新体制，转变对外贸易和投资方式，继续推动对外贸易由量的扩张转向质的提升。	
We have worked hard to remove systematical institutional barriers that impede development through comprehensive reform. As many as 360 major reform initiatives and more than 1,500 reform measures have been taken. Breakthroughs have been made in key areas, and general frameworks for reform have been put in place in major sectors. We have sped up efforts to build new institutions of the open economy and transform models of foreign trade and outbound investment to continue the shift from quantitative to qualitative improvement in trade.
我们全方位推进理论创新、实践创新、制度创新、文化创新以及其他各方面创新，不断释放增长新动能。中国正成为各种创新要素发挥集聚效应的广阔平台，不论基础设施还是经济业态，不论商业模式还是消费方式，都迸发出创新的澎湃动能。	
We have advanced theoretical, practical, institutional, cultural and other explorations to unleash new impetus for growth. China has become a huge platform where all factors and players of innovation converge to make a real difference. From infrastructure to various economic sectors, from business models to ways of consumption, innovation is leading the way.
我们深入贯彻以人民为中心的发展思想，努力提升发展的包容性和共享水平。居民收入持续较快增长，连续多年跑赢同期国内生产总值。城乡区域收入分配差距持续缩小，中等收入群体持续扩大，基尼系数下降，每年新增城镇就业已连续4年保持1300万人以上。绿色发展取得显著成效，能源资源消耗强度大幅下降，生态环境治理明显加强。	
We have pursued a people-centered philosophy of development to make our development more inclusive and beneficial to all. Individual income has registered sustained growth, outpacing GDP growth for many years. Income gaps between urban and rural areas and between different regions have been narrowing, middle-income group expanding, and Gini coefficient dropping. More than 13 million new urban jobs have been created every year for four consecutive years. Significant advances have been made in pursuing green development, resulting in considerable reduction in the intensity of energy and resource consumption and marked improvement in the ecological environment.
让所有贫困人口脱贫，是中国政府对人民作出的承诺，也是我牵挂最多、花精力最多的一件事情。过去5年，我走访了全国很多贫困地区，目的是找准致贫的根源，提出管用的举措。中国脱贫攻坚战取得决定性进展。5年来，又有6000多万贫困人口稳定脱贫，贫困发生率持续下降，贫困地区农村居民人均收入保持两位数增长。这一成果来之不易，我们为之感到自豪。	
To lift all the remaining poor people out of poverty is a solemn commitment made by the Chinese government to the people. It is uppermost in my mind, and I have spent more energy on poverty alleviation than anything else. Over the past five years, I have been to many poor areas in China to pin down the causes of poverty and address them in a targeted way. As a result, decisive progress has been made in the fight against poverty. Over the past five years, we have lifted more than 60 million people out of poverty. The poverty headcount ratio has declined, and per capita rural income in poor areas has maintained double-digit growth. This has not come easily, and we are proud of what we have achieved in poverty alleviation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国的发展是一个历史进程。上个月，中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会在北京胜利召开。大会聚焦人民对美好生活的向往，制定了新时代中国特色社会主义的行动纲领和发展蓝图。2020年，中国将全面建成小康社会。到2035年，中国将基本实现社会主义现代化。到本世纪中叶，中国将建成富强民主文明和谐美丽的社会主义现代化强国。在中国共产党领导下，中国人民将开启新征程。	
China's development is an evolving historical process. Last month, the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China was successfully convened in Beijing. Responding to our people's desire for a better life, the Congress formulated a guide to action and a development blueprint for China in the new era. It is envisaged that by 2020, China will turn itself into a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and by 2035, China will basically realize socialist modernization. By the middle of this century, China will become a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally-advanced, harmonious and beautiful. Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people will embark on a new journey.
第一，这是全面深化改革、持续释放发展活力的新征程。解决前进道路上的困难和问题，关键在于全面深化改革。我们将强化问题导向，坚决破除一切不合时宜的思想观念和体制机制弊端，突破利益固化的藩篱，激发全社会创造力和发展活力。我们将构建系统完备、科学规范、运行有效的制度体系，不断推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化。明年，我们将隆重纪念改革开放40周年。中国改革的领域将更广、举措将更多、力度将更强。
First, this is a new journey of deepening reform across the board and unleashing dynamism for development. To resolve difficulties and problems on the way forward, we must deepen all-round reform. We will focus more on solving problems, get rid of all outdated thinking and ideas and all institutional ailments and break through the blockades of vested interests to inspire creativity and vitality throughout society. We will develop a set of institutions that are well conceived, fully built, procedure based, and efficiently functioning and achieve modernization of China's system and capacity for governance. Next year, we will celebrate the 40th anniversary of China's launching of the reform and opening-up initiative. China's reform will cover more areas; and more and stronger steps will be taken in pursuing this endeavor.
第二，这是与时俱进、创新发展方式的新征程。中国经济已经由高速增长阶段转向高质量发展阶段。我们将贯彻新发展理念，坚持质量第一、效益优先，建设现代化经济体系。我们将以供给侧结构性改革为主线，推动经济发展质量变革、效率变革、动力变革，提高全要素生产率，着力加快建设实体经济、科技创新、现代金融、人力资源协同发展的产业体系，着力构建市场机制有效、微观主体有活力、宏观调控有度的经济体制，不断增强经济创新力和竞争力。我们将推动互联网、大数据、人工智能和实体经济深入融合，在数字经济、共享经济、清洁能源等领域培育新的增长动能。我们将不断探索区域协调发展新机制新路径，大力推动京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展，建设雄安新区、粤港澳大湾区，建设世界级城市群，打造新的经济增长极。	
Second, this is a new journey of moving with the times and exploring new model of development. China's economy is in a transition from a phase of rapid growth to a stage of high-quality development. We will be guided by a new development philosophy, put quality first, give priority to performance and develop a modernized economy. We will pursue supply-side structural reform as our main task, work hard to achieve better quality and higher efficiency performance, and create more robust growth through reform. We will raise total factor productivity and accelerate the building of an industrial system that promotes coordinated development of the real economy with technological innovation, modern finance, and a talent pool. We will endeavor to develop an economy with more effective market mechanisms, dynamic micro-entities, and sound macro-regulation. All these efforts will make China's economy more innovative and competitive. We will promote further integration of the internet, big data, and artificial intelligence with the real economy, and cultivate new drivers of growth in digital economy, sharing economy, clean energy and other areas. We will continue to explore new mechanisms and pathways for achieving coordinated development among regions, promote coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, Yangtze Economic Belt, Xiongan New Area, and Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, build world-class city clusters and foster new source of growth.
一个创新步伐加快、发展质量更优的中国，经济新业态不断涌现，创新成果加快转化应用，区域经济实现协同发展，将产生更广泛、更强大的辐射效应，带来更多合作机会，让更多国家搭乘中国发展的快车。	
As China works hard to pursue innovation and higher quality of growth, new forms of business will keep emerging, more innovations will be used, and development of various regions in China will become more balanced. All this will create a more powerful and extensive impact, present more opportunities of cooperation and enable more countries to board the express train of China's development.
第三，这是进一步走向世界、发展更高层次开放型经济的新征程。中国对外开放的脚步不会停滞。我们将同各国一道，深入推进“一带一路”建设，增添共同发展新动力。我们将实行高水平的贸易和投资自由化便利化政策，全面实行准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度，大幅度放宽市场准入，扩大服务业对外开放，保护外商投资合法权益。凡是在中国境内注册的企业，我们都会一视同仁、平等对待。我们将赋予自由贸易试验区更大改革自主权，探索建设自由贸易港。我们将加快同有关国家商签自由贸易协定和投资协定，推动建设亚太自由贸易区，推动区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判尽早结束，构建面向全球的自由贸易区网络。	
Third, this is a new journey toward greater integration with the world and an open economy of higher standards. China will not slow its steps in opening up itself. We will work together with other countries to create new drivers of common development through the launching of the Belt and Road Initiative. We will adopt policies to promote high-standard liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment. We will implement the system of pre-establishment national treatment plus a negative list across the board, significantly ease market access, further open the service sector, and protect the legitimate rights and interests of foreign investors. All businesses registered in China will be treated as equals. We will grant more powers to pilot free trade zones to conduct reform, and explore the opening of free trade ports. We will speed up negotiations with partner countries on the concluding of free trade agreements and investment treaties, advance the building of FTAAP, work for the speedy conclusion of RCEP negotiations, and endeavor to establish a global network of free trade areas.
未来15年，中国市场将进一步扩大，发展将更加全面。预计将进口24万亿美元商品，吸收2万亿美元境外直接投资，对外投资总额将达到2万亿美元。明年11月，我们将在上海举办首届中国国际进口博览会，这将为各方进行开辟中国市场的合作搭建新平台。	
In the next 15 years, China will have an even larger market and more comprehensive development. It is estimated that China will import US$24 trillion worth of goods, attract US$2 trillion inbound direct investment and make US$2 trillion of outbound investment. In November next year, China will hold the first China International Import Expo in Shanghai, which will provide a new platform for expanding cooperation in China's market among all parties.
第四，这是以人民为中心、迈向美好生活的新征程。让人民过上好日子，是我们一切工作的出发点和落脚点。我们将坚持在发展中保障和改善民生，不断满足人民日益增长的美好生活需要，不断促进社会公平正义，使人民获得感、幸福感、安全感更加完善、更有保障、更可持续。我们将持续推进精准扶贫、精准脱贫，实现到2020年我国现行标准下农村贫困人口脱贫的目标。全面建成小康社会，13亿多中国人，一个都不能少！	
Fourth, this is a new journey toward a better life for the people. To secure a better life for our people is what we aim to achieve in everything we do. We will ensure and improve living standards through development and meet people's ever-growing needs for a better life. We will continue to promote social fairness and justice to see that our people will always have a strong sense of gains, happiness, and security. We will continue to implement targeted poverty reduction and alleviation measures and ensure that by the year 2020, all rural residents living below the current poverty line are lifted out of poverty. Each and every one of the over 1.3 billion Chinese people should lead decent lives. No one will be left behind!
我们将加快生态文明体制改革，坚持走绿色、低碳、可持续发展之路，实行最严格的生态环境保护制度。到2035年，中国的生态环境将根本好转，美丽中国目标将基本实现。我们将积极应对气候变化，保护好人类赖以生存的共同家园。中国二氧化碳排放将于2030年左右达到峰值并争取尽早达峰，非化石能源占一次能源消费比重将达到20%左右。只要是认准了的事情，我们都会坚持不懈做下去！	
We will speed up institutional reform for ecological conservation, pursue green, low-carbon and sustainable development, and implement the strictest possible system for environmental protection. By 2035, there will be a fundamental improvement in the environment; the goal of building a Beautiful China will be basically attained. We will actively tackle climate change, and protect our common home for the sake of human survival. China's carbon dioxide emission is expected to peak around 2030, and we will make every effort for such emissions to reach the peak ahead of time. We will increase the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to around 20% by 2030. Once we set a target, we will not stop our efforts until it is met!
第五，这是推动构建新型国际关系、推动构建人类命运共同体的新征程。中国人民的梦想同各国人民的梦想息息相通。当今世界充满挑战，前面的道路不会平坦，但我们不会放弃理想追求，将以更大的作为，同各方携手建设持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。	
Fifth, this is a new journey toward a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind. The dream of us Chinese is closely connected with the dreams of people of other countries. Our world is full of challenges and the road ahead will not be smooth. But we will not give up on our dream. We will double our efforts and work with all others to build an open, inclusive, clean, and beautiful world that enjoys durable peace, universal security, and common prosperity.
中国人民讲求以和为贵、协和万邦。我们将坚持走和平发展道路，始终做世界和亚太地区的和平稳定之锚。我们将秉持正确义利观，积极发展全球伙伴关系，扩大同各国的利益汇合点，推动建设相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系。我们将秉持共商共建共享理念，积极参与全球治理体系改革和建设，推动国际政治经济秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。	
We Chinese believe that peace is most precious and that there should be harmony among all nations. We are committed to peaceful development and we will remain an anchor for peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond. China will, guided by the principle of upholding justice while pursuing shared interests, actively develop global partnerships, expand the convergence of interests with other countries, and work to foster a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice, and win-win cooperation. Acting on the principle of achieving shared growth through consultation and collaboration, we will get actively involved in reforming and developing the global governance system to make the international political and economic order more just and equitable.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
亚太的和平、稳定、繁荣属于全体亚太人民，亚太的未来要靠亚太人民携手创造。互信、包容、合作、共赢的伙伴关系，是亚太大家庭的精神纽带，是确保亚太合作处在正确轨道上的重要保障。让我们脚踏实地推进合作，扎扎实实采取行动，共同建设亚太更加美好的明天！	
All of our people in the Asia-Pacific deserve peace, stability and prosperity; and all of us in the region should jointly deliver a bright future for the Asia-Pacific. Partnerships based on mutual trust, inclusiveness, cooperation and mutual benefit: This is what keeps our big Asia-Pacific family together and ensures the success of Asia-Pacific cooperation. Let us take solid steps to promote cooperation and usher in an even brighter future for the Asia-Pacific.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
