48. 习近平在金砖国家工商论坛上的讲话
顺应时代潮流 实现共同发展
——在金砖国家工商论坛上的讲话
（2018年7月25日，约翰内斯堡）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Keeping Abreast of the Trend of the Times to Achieve Common Development
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the BRICS Business Forum 
Johannesburg, 25 July 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的多哥总统福雷，
尊敬的马布扎副总统，
各位部长，
各位工商界朋友，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa, 
Your Excellency President Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, 
Your Excellency Deputy President David Mabuza of South Africa, 
Ministers, 
Friends from the business community, 
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
下午好！很高兴再次来到“彩虹之国”，同大家相聚在风景秀丽的约翰内斯堡。5年前，我担任中国国家主席之后出席的首场国际峰会，就是在德班举行的金砖国家领导人第五次会晤。3年前，就在这座会议中心，我同非洲各国领导人一道出席了中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会。
Good afternoon! I am delighted to visit South Africa, the "rainbow nation," once again and meet you here in the beautiful city of Johannesburg. The first international summit I attended after taking office as Chinese president five years ago was the fifth BRICS Summit held in Durban. Three years ago, right here in this convention center, I attended the FOCAC Johannesburg Summit with African leaders.
时隔近3年，再次踏上非洲大陆，我深切感受到非洲大陆的蓬勃发展、欣欣向荣。
Nearly three years on, as I once again set foot on the African continent, I am struck by its robust growth and strong vitality.
2017年9月，在各方大力支持下，中国成功主办了金砖国家领导人厦门会晤。五国领导人一致决定深化战略伙伴关系，巩固经贸财金、政治安全、人文交流“三轮驱动”合作架构，确立“金砖+”合作理念，共同开创金砖合作第二个“金色十年”。
Thanks to the strong support of all participating parties, China successfully hosted the BRICS Xiamen Summit last September. We as BRICS leaders unanimously agreed to strengthen our strategic partnership, consolidate the cooperation architecture with its three main drivers, namely, economic cooperation, political and security cooperation, and people-to-people exchanges. We thus laid out a vision of BRICS+ cooperation and jointly ushered in the second Golden Decade of BRICS cooperation.
我听说，约翰内斯堡在恩古尼语中被称为“黄金之城”。在“黄金之城”勾画“金色十年”蓝图美景，再恰当不过了！我期待着同各位领导人一道，推动金砖合作从约翰内斯堡再出发，踏上新征程，完成新使命！
I understand that in the Nguni language, Johannesburg means the "Place of Gold." We cannot find a better place to chart the course for our Golden Decade than in this city of gold. Here in Johannesburg, I look forward to working with other BRICS leaders to embark on a new journey of BRICS cooperation and fulfill our new mission.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
金砖机制的诞生和发展，是世界经济变迁和国际格局演变的产物。在第一个10年里，金砖合作乘势而起，亮点纷呈。五国秉持开放包容、合作共赢金砖精神，推动各领域务实合作不断深入，深化了团结互信，增进了五国人民福祉，拉紧了利益和情感纽带，为世界经济企稳复苏并重回增长之路作出了突出贡献。
The BRICS mechanism owes its birth and growth to evolution of both the global economy and the international landscape. In its first decade, BRICS cooperation got off the ground and bore rich fruit. We five BRICS countries, guided by the BRICS spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, have deepened our cooperation, enhanced our solidarity and mutual trust, improved the lives of our peoples, and made our bond of interests and friendship even closer. Indeed, our cooperation has contributed much to global economic recovery and growth.
当今世界正面临百年未有之大变局。对广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家而言，这个世界既充满机遇，也存在挑战。我们要在国际格局演变的历史进程中运筹金砖合作，在世界发展和金砖国家共同发展的历史进程中谋求自身发展，在“金色十年”里实现新的飞跃。
We are witnessing major changes unfolding in our world, something unseen in a century. This is a world of both opportunities and challenges for us emerging markets and developing countries. We should pursue BRICS cooperation in the historical process of global transformation, and we should promote the development of our own countries in the historical course of promoting the common development of both BRICS countries and other countries in the world, thus making new advances in the next Golden Decade.
——未来10年，将是世界经济新旧动能转换的关键10年。人工智能、大数据、量子信息、生物技术等新一轮科技革命和产业变革正在积聚力量，催生大量新产业、新业态、新模式，给全球发展和人类生产生活带来翻天覆地的变化。我们要抓住这个重大机遇，推动新兴市场国家和发展中国家实现跨越式发展。
-- The next decade will be a crucial one in which new global growth drivers will take the place of old ones. A new round of revolution and transformation in science, technology and industries featuring artificial intelligence, big data, quantum information and bio-technology are gaining momentum. They are giving birth to a large number of new industries and business forms and models and will fundamentally change global development and people's work and lives. We must seize this important opportunity to enable emerging markets and developing countries to achieve leapfrog development.
——未来10年，将是国际格局和力量对比加速演变的10年。新兴市场国家和发展中国家对世界经济增长的贡献率已经达到80%。按汇率法计算，这些国家的经济总量占世界的比重接近40%。保持现在的发展速度，10年后将接近世界总量一半。新兴市场国家和发展中国家群体性崛起势不可当，将使全球发展的版图更加全面均衡，使世界和平的基础更为坚实稳固。
-- The next decade will see faster changes in the international landscape and the international alignment of forces. Emerging markets and developing countries already contribute 80 percent of global economic growth. Based on exchange rate calculation, these countries account for nearly 40 percent of the global economic output. Growing at their current rates, these countries will see their economic output approach half of the global total in a decade. The collective rise of emerging markets and developing countries is unstoppable, and it will make global development more balanced and global peace more firmly based.
——未来10年，将是全球治理体系深刻重塑的10年。世界多极化、经济全球化在曲折中前行，地缘政治热点此起彼伏，恐怖主义、武装冲突的阴霾挥之不去。单边主义、保护主义愈演愈烈，多边主义和多边贸易体制受到严重冲击。要合作还是要对立，要开放还是要封闭，要互利共赢还是要以邻为壑，国际社会再次来到何去何从的十字路口。全球治理体系的走向，关乎各国特别是新兴市场国家和发展中国家发展空间，关乎全世界繁荣稳定。
-- The next decade will see a profound reshaping of the global governance system. The world is moving toward multi-polarity and greater economic globalization amid setbacks. Geopolitical hotspots keep emerging, and the dark shadow of terrorism and armed conflicts still haunts us. Unilateralism and protectionism are mounting, dealing a severe blow to multilateralism and the multilateral trading regime. The international community has reached a new crossroads; and we are facing a choice between cooperation and confrontation, between opening-up and a close-door policy, and between mutual benefit and a beggar-thy-neighbor approach. Thus, the evolution of global governance system will have a profound impact on the development of all countries, particularly emerging markets and developing countries, and indeed on the prosperity and stability of the whole world.
金砖国家要顺应历史大势，把握发展机遇，合力克服挑战，为构建新型国际关系、构建人类命运共同体发挥建设性作用。
We BRICS countries should keep abreast of the historical trend, seize development opportunities, jointly meet challenges, and play a constructive role in building a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，坚持合作共赢，建设开放经济。开放合作是科技进步和生产力发展的必然逻辑。贸易战不可取，因为不会有赢家。经济霸权主义更要不得，因为这将损害国际社会共同利益，最终也将搬起石头砸自己的脚。
First, we should pursue win-win cooperation to build an open economy. Openness and cooperation are the sure way to achieve progress in science and technology and growth of productivity. A trade war should be rejected, because there will be no winner. Economic hegemony is even more objectionable, as it will undermine the collective interests of the international community; those who pursue this course will only end up hurting themselves.
在世界经济经历深刻调整变革之时，只有开放才能使不同国家相互受益、共同繁荣、持久发展，才是各国应当作出的明智选择。金砖国家要坚定建设开放型世界经济，旗帜鲜明反对单边主义和保护主义，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，共同引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢方向发展。要让经济全球化的正面效应更多释放出来，帮助新兴市场国家和发展中国家，特别是非洲国家和最不发达国家有效参与国际产业分工，共享经济全球化的红利。
As the world economy is going through profound transition and changes, only by opening themselves can different countries achieve mutual benefit, shared prosperity and sustainable development. This should be the right choice for all countries. We BRICS countries should firmly promote an open world economy, be resolute in rejecting unilateralism and protectionism, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and jointly steer the global economy toward greater openness, inclusiveness, balanced growth and win-win outcomes for all. We should ensure that economic globalization will deliver more benefits. We should help emerging markets and developing countries, African countries and the least developed countries in particular, fully involve themselves in international division of labor and share in the benefits of economic globalization.
第二，坚持创新引领，把握发展机遇。科技是第一生产力，为人类文明进步提供了不竭动力。人类曾经历农业文明、工业文明的数次飞跃，带来了社会生产力大发展，同时也伴生着蜕变的阵痛。今天，世界再次来到这样一个重要历史节点。在新一轮科技革命和产业变革大潮中，除旧布新必然导致产业变革，这个过程是艰难痛苦的。成功跨越蜕变，各国将得到发展新生机、新活力，给人民带来更好生活、更多福祉。
Second, we should pursue innovation and seize development opportunities. Science and technology, as the primary production forces, have provided inexhaustible power driving progress of human civilization. Humanity had made giant leaps forward as it progressed from an agricultural civilization to an industrial civilization, a process which created both huge gains in social productivity and growing pains. The world today has once again reached a critical historic juncture. In the unfolding new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation, new things will inevitably emerge and take the place of old ones. Indeed, this will be a difficult and painful process. But if countries succeed in seizing opportunities that have presented themselves, they will be able to achieve new dynamic growth and deliver better lives to their people.
在新科技带来的新机遇面前，每个国家都有平等发展权利。潮流来了，跟不上就会落后，就会被淘汰。我们能够做的和应该做的就是要抢抓机遇，加大创新投入，着力培育新的经济增长点，实现新旧动能转换。要全力推进结构性改革，消除一切不利于创新的体制机制障碍，充分激发创新潜能和市场活力。要树立全球视野，深化国际创新交流合作，发挥各自比较优势和资源禀赋，让科技进步惠及更多国家和人民。同时，我们要妥善化解信息化、自动化、智能化对传统产业的冲击，在培育新产业过程中创造新的就业机会。
In the face of new opportunities brought by new science and technology, every country has an equal right to development. Those who fail to keep abreast of the trend of the times will fall behind and become irrelevant. What we can and should do is to seize opportunities, increase input in innovation, focus on creating new areas of growth and replace old growth drivers with new ones. We should endeavor to advance structural reform, remove all institutional barriers to innovation and fully unlock innovation potential and energize the market. We should develop a global perspective, boost international exchanges and cooperation in innovation, and fully leverage each other's comparative strengths and resource endowment, so as to enable more countries and people to benefit from scientific and technological advances. At the same time, we should ease the impact of application of information technology, automation and smart technology on traditional industries and create new job opportunities in the process of fostering new industries.
第三，坚持包容普惠，造福各国人民。发展不平衡、不充分问题是各国面临的共同挑战。一方面，新兴市场国家和发展中国家同发达国家的南北差距仍很明显。另一方面，在各国内部，也都不同程度存在发展差距。
Third, we should pursue inclusive growth to deliver benefits to people of all countries. Uneven and insufficient development is a common challenge facing all countries. The North-South gap, namely, the gap between developed countries and emerging markets and developing countries, remains huge. And there are also development gaps of varying degrees within countries.
2030年可持续发展议程为国际社会提供了综合行动方案。金砖国家要立足自身国情，将2030年议程同本国发展战略深入对接，坚持以人民为中心，统筹经济、社会、环境发展，不断增强人民群众的获得感、幸福感。要坚持人与自然和谐共生，推动国际社会全面落实《巴黎协定》，加快构筑尊崇自然、绿色发展的生态体系。要积极推动国际发展合作，敦促发达国家履行官方发展援助承诺，增加对广大发展中国家的支持。
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a comprehensive action plan for the international community. We BRICS countries should, basing ourselves on our actual national conditions, follow the guidance of the 2030 Agenda as we pursue our own development strategies. We should put people first, ensure coordinated economic and social development and protect the environment, thus giving our people a stronger sense of fulfillment and happiness. We should ensure harmony between man and nature and encourage the international community to fully implement the Paris Agreement. We should treat nature with awe and do more to foster an ecological system conducive to green development. It is necessary to promote international development cooperation, urge developed countries to fulfill their promises on official development assistance and increase support to developing countries.
非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆，也是全球最具发展潜力的地区。我们要加强对非合作，支持非洲发展，努力把金砖国家同非洲合作打造成南南合作的样板。具体合作中，应该结合自身实际，积极同非洲国家开展减贫、粮食安全、创新、基础设施建设、工业化等领域项目合作，帮助各国经济结构发展，为落实非盟《2063年议程》提供助力，让古老的非洲大地展现出旺盛生机活力。
Home to more developing countries than any other continent, Africa has more development potential than any other region in the world. We should strengthen cooperation with Africa, support its development and make BRICS-Africa cooperation a model for South-South cooperation. We should actively carry out cooperation with African countries in such areas as poverty reduction, food security, innovation, infrastructure development and industrialization in a way compatible with their national conditions. We should help African countries develop their economic structure, contribute to the implementation of Agenda 2063 of the African Union and thus enable Africa, an ancient continent, to gain strong vitality.
第四，坚持多边主义，完善全球治理。良好稳定的外部环境，是所有国家发展的重要前提，对新兴市场国家和发展中国家来说更是如此。现行国际秩序并不完美，但只要它以规则为基础，以公平为导向，以共赢为目标，就不能随意被舍弃，更容不得推倒重来。
Fourth, we should uphold multilateralism and improve global governance. An enabling and stable external environment is crucial for the development of all countries, especially emerging markets and developing countries. Obviously, the current international order is not a perfect one. But as long as it is rule-based, aims to be equitable and pursues win-win outcomes as its goal, such an international order should not be discarded at will, still less should it be dismantled and rebuilt all over again.
金砖国家要坚定奉行多边主义，敦促各方切实遵守共同制定的国际规则，坚持大小国家一律平等，大家的事商量着办，反对霸权主义和强权政治。要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，积极参与斡旋解决地缘政治热点问题。要坚定支持多边贸易体制，继续推进全球经济治理改革，提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权。不管是创新、贸易投资、知识产权保护等问题，还是网络、外空、极地等新疆域，在制定新规则时都要充分听取新兴市场国家和发展中国家意见，反映他们的利益和诉求，确保他们的发展空间。
We BRICS countries must uphold multilateralism. We should urge all parties to fully observe collectively adopted international rules, and we should treat all countries as equals regardless of their size, address issues that matter to all through consultation and oppose hegemony and power politics. We should promote common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, get actively involved in mediation efforts for resolving geopolitical hotspot issues. It is important for us to firmly support the multilateral trading regime, advance global economic governance reform and increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries. When new rules are made on such issues as innovation, trade and investment and intellectual property protection or on new frontiers including cyberspace, outer space or the polar regions, we should make sure that the views of emerging markets and developing countries are heeded, their interests and demands are taken into consideration, and there are sufficient opportunities for their development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
今年是中国改革开放40周年。艰难困苦，玉汝于成。40年来，中国走过了不平凡的历程，成功开辟了中国特色社会主义道路。中国人民立足国情，放眼世界，既从悠久的中华文明中汲取智慧，又博采东西方各国之长，不断走向世界、融入世界，在实现自身发展的同时，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出了重要贡献。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. Success only comes through hard work. During the past 40 years, China has come a long way. With strenuous efforts, China has blazed a path of building socialism with distinctive Chinese features. Proceeding from China's realities and developing a global vision, we in China have both drawn strength from the wisdom of the time-honored Chinese civilization and learned from other countries, both east and west. We have embraced the world and integrated our country fully into it. While pursuing its own development, China has also made important contribution to peace and development of mankind.
作为世界最大的发展中国家，我们将牢牢把握时代发展脉搏，深入贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享发展理念，加快推进创新驱动发展战略，深入参与国际创新和技术合作，积极开展南南合作，努力为新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同发展创造更大机遇。
As the world's biggest developing country, China will ride the trend of the times and pursue innovation-driven, coordinated, green and open development for all. We will step up efforts to pursue innovation-driven development and fully engage in international cooperation on innovation and technologies. We will take an active part in South-South cooperation to foster greater opportunities for common development of emerging markets and developing countries.
我们将继续敞开大门搞建设。在今年4月举行的博鳌亚洲论坛年会上，我宣布了一系列扩大开放新举措，这些举措正在快速落实。我们将继续创造更具吸引力的投资环境，加强同国际规则对接，增加透明度，坚持依法办事，鼓励竞争，反对垄断。我们将加强知识产权保护，加大执法力度，提高违法成本，鼓励企业间正常技术交流合作，保护所有企业合法知识产权。我们将主动扩大进口，促进经常项目收支平衡。
China will continue to develop itself with its door wide open. At the annual conference of the Boao Forum for Asia held last April, I announced a number of new initiatives to open China further, and these initiatives are being speedily pursued. China will build a more investment-friendly environment that is aligned with international standards, more transparent and law-based and encourages competition and opposes monopoly. China will take tough law enforcement steps to strengthen protection of intellectual property rights and make IPR infringement even more costly. We encourage companies to maintain normal technological exchanges and cooperation, and will see to it that their lawful intellectual property rights are protected. China will also increase imports to promote balance of payment under the current account.
今年11月，中国将在上海举办首届中国国际进口博览会。这是中方坚定支持贸易自由化、主动向世界开放市场的重大举措，将为各方进入中国市场搭建新的平台。目前，已有130多个国家和地区、2800多家企业确认参加博览会，预计到会国内外采购商将超过15万人。欢迎金砖国家和非洲国家工商界朋友赴华参会，共襄盛举。
China will host the first China International Import Expo in Shanghai this November, a major move to firmly support trade liberalization and open its market. The Expo will serve as a new platform for the world to access the Chinese market. By now, over 130 countries and regions and more than 2,800 companies have confirmed participation and over 150,000 buyers in and outside China are expected to attend this fair. I welcome business leaders from other BRICS and African countries to attend the Expo.
我们将继续大力推进“一带一路”建设，为各国经济社会发展、落实2030年议程开辟新空间。共建“一带一路”倡议秉持共商共建共享原则，源于中国，属于世界。我们真诚希望金砖国家、非洲国家、广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家加入共建“一带一路”伙伴网络，让共建“一带一路”成果惠及更多国家和人民。
China will continue to vigorously pursue the Belt and Road Initiative to create new opportunities of social and economic development for participating countries and for them to implement the UN 2030 Agenda. The Belt and Road Initiative, guided by the principle of seeking shared benefits through extensive consultation and joint contribution, originated in China but belongs to the world. It is our sincere hope that other BRICS countries, African countries and other emerging markets and developing countries will forge strong partnerships with this initiative so that its benefits will reach more countries and their peoples.
中国是非洲国家天然的好朋友、好兄弟、好伙伴，中非合作是南南合作的典范。今年9月，中方将和非洲国家共同举办中非合作论坛北京峰会。这次峰会将以“合作共赢，携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体”为主题，重点是把中非共建“一带一路”、 2030年议程、《2063年议程》同非洲各国发展战略结合起来，在更高质量、更高水平上实现中非合作共赢、共同发展。
China and African countries are destined to be good friends, good brothers and good partners, and China-Africa cooperation stands as a fine example of South-South cooperation. This coming September will see a reunion of China and African countries at the Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in Beijing. Themed on "China and Africa: Toward an Even Stronger Community with a Shared Future through Win-Win Cooperation," the Beijing Summit aims to enhance complementarity between China-Africa joint efforts to pursue the Belt and Road Initiative, the 2030 Agenda and the 2063 Agenda on the one hand and the development strategies of African countries on the other. This will enable China and Africa to pursue high quality and high standard cooperation for mutual benefit and common development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
经济合作是金砖合作最重要、成果最丰富的领域。今年在各方共同努力下，金砖经济合作迈出新步伐。我们将共同建设金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系，加强宏观经济政策协调，促进创新和工业化合作，联手加快经济新旧动能转换和转型升级。五国还在贸易便利化、服务贸易、电子商务、知识产权等方面深化合作，取得了积极成果。这些措施有利于我们在当今世界变局中抓住机遇、应对挑战，也有利于我们把金砖经济伙伴战略落到实处。
Business cooperation is the most important and fruitful aspect of BRICS cooperation. Thanks to our joint efforts, new advances have been made in this cooperation this year. We BRICS countries will forge a partnership on the new industrial revolution, which involves more coordination of macro economic policies, closer cooperation on innovation and industrialization and joint efforts to accelerate economic upgrading and the replacement of growth drivers. Our five BRICS countries have also made good progress in cooperation on trade facilitation, service trade, e-commerce, intellectual property rights and in other fields. These steps will enable us to seize opportunities and meet challenges in a changing world and enrich the BRICS Economic Partnership Strategy.
工商界是金砖经济合作的主力军、生力军。在开创第二个“金色十年”过程中，工商界大有可为。希望各位企业家朋友充分发挥各自优势，促进五国互利共赢，实现共同发展。希望你们勇于改革创新，敢于先行先试，为五国发展、为新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同发展闯出一片天地。希望你们密切结合人民实际需要，既追求经济效益，也注重社会效益，筑牢金砖合作民意基础。
The business community is the mainstay of BRICS economic cooperation and a dynamic force driving it. As business leaders, you have a great role to play in shaping the second Golden Decade of BRICS cooperation. I hope that you will fully leverage your strengths to enhance win-win cooperation for common development between our five countries. As business leaders, you should take bold steps to explore new ground in pursuing reform and innovation. And working together, you can surely open up new horizon for the development of our five countries and other emerging markets and developing countries. I also hope you will keep in mind the needs of the people and pursue both economic and social returns, so as to increase public support for BRICS cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
今年是曼德拉先生诞辰100周年。他有一句名言：“攀上一座高山后，你会发现，还有更多的高山等着你去攀登。”金砖合作的历程，正是五国携手勇攀高峰、不断超越的历程。只要金砖国家携手同心，就能不断攀越险峰峭壁，登顶新的高峰、到达新的高度，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出新的更大的贡献！
This year marks the centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela. Let me quote one of his famous sayings, "After climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are many more hills to climb." Indeed, the history of BRICS cooperation is a journey of our five countries climbing great hills only to reach new heights. I am convinced that when our five countries forge ahead together, we will scale new peaks, reach new heights, and make even greater contribution to peace and development of mankind.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
