22. 习近平在第二届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
开放合作　命运与共
Openness and Cooperation for a Shared Future
——在第二届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2019年11月5日，上海）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the Second China International Import Expo
Shanghai, 5 November 2019 
尊敬的马克龙总统，
尊敬的霍尔尼斯总理，
尊敬的米佐塔基斯总理，
尊敬的布尔纳比奇总理，
尊敬的各位议长，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各代表团团长，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellency President Emmanuel Macron,
Your Excellencies Prime Minister Andrew Holness, Prime Minister
Kyriakos Mitsotakis, and Prime Minister Ana Brnabić,
Your Excellencies Speakers of Parliament,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Your Excellencies Heads of Delegations,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
在这多彩的深秋时节，很高兴同大家相聚在黄浦江畔。现在，我宣布，第二届中国国际进口博览会正式开幕！
In this lovely season tinted with deep autumn hues, it gives me great pleasure to get together with you by the Huangpu River. I now declare open the second China International Import Expo!
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对远道而来的各位嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！向来自世界各地的新老朋友们，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！
At the outset, on behalf of the Chinese government and people as well as in my own name, a hearty welcome to all the distinguished guests from afar! To the many old and new friends gathered here from across the world, I give you my warm greetings and best wishes!
一年前，我们在这里成功举办了首届中国国际进口博览会。今天，更多朋友如约而至。本届中国国际进口博览会延续“新时代，共享未来”的主题。我相信，各位朋友都能乘兴而来、满意而归！
A year ago in this same place, the inaugural China International Import Expo was successfully held. Today, we are happy to be joined by even more friends in the second Expo that carries on the theme of “New Era, Shared Future”. I trust that you will all find your participation in the event worthwhile and rewarding!
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
去年，我在首届进博会上宣布了中国扩大对外开放的5方面举措，对上海提出了3点进一步开放的要求。一年来，这些开放措施已经基本落实。其中，上海自由贸易试验区临港新片区已经正式设立，我们推而广之，还在其他省份新设了6个自由贸易试验区；再就是上海证券交易所设立科创板并试点注册制已经正式实施；长三角区域一体化发展已经作为国家战略正式实施；这两年来，中国的国家战略又迈出新的步伐，粤港澳大湾区战略、京津冀一体化战略、长江经济带战略、黄河流域生态保护和高质量发展战略、东北振兴战略、西部开发战略，今年又明确了长三角发展的新战略。《外商投资法》将于明年1月1日起实行；全面实施准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度已经出台；扩大进口促进消费、进一步降低关税等取得重大进展。去年，我在进博会期间举行的双边活动中同有关国家达成98项合作事项，现在清点一下，其中23项已经办结，47项正在积极推进，28项也在跟进推进。
At last year’s Expo, I announced the initiatives China was to take in the five areas of further opening-up and spelt out three specific steps for Shanghai to open wider to the world. One year on, these initiatives and steps have been by and large put in place. The Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone now has a Lingang special area, and six other new pilot free trade zones have been set up in other provinces of the country. The Shanghai Stock Exchange launched a sci-tech innovation board, with a registration system being piloted for the listing of companies. In the Yangtze River Delta area, a plan for integrated development of the region has been introduced as a national strategy. At the national level, a Foreign Investment Law will enter into force on 1 January next year. A management system combining pre-establishment national treatment and the negative list has been effected nationwide. Major progress is being made in increasing imports to boost consumption and in bringing down the tariff level. For last year’s Expo, during my bilateral events with foreign leaders, 98 initiatives were agreed upon, of which 23 have now been completed, 47 are making good progress, and 28 are on track of steady implementation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
经济全球化是历史潮流。长江、尼罗河、亚马逊河、多瑙河昼夜不息、奔腾向前，尽管有时会出现一些回头浪，尽管也会遇到许多险滩暗礁，但大江大河奔腾向前的势头，这是谁也阻挡不了的。
Economic globalization represents the trend of history. Like the world’s great rivers, the Yangtze, the Nile, the Amazon and the Danube — they all surge forward in relentless flow, and nothing can stop their mighty movement, not the current of undertows or hidden shoals or rocks beneath the water.
世界经济发展面临的难题，没有哪一个国家能独自解决。各国应该坚持人类优先的理念，而不应把一己之利凌驾于人类利益之上。我们要以更加开放的心态和举措，共同把全球市场的蛋糕做大、把全球共享的机制做实、把全球合作的方式做活，共同把经济全球化动力搞得越大越好、阻力搞得越小越好。
Of the problems confronting the world economy, none can be resolved by a single country alone. We must all put the common good of humanity first rather than place one’s own interest above the common interest of all. We must have a more open mindset and take more open steps, and work together to make the pie of the global market even bigger. We need to strengthen the mechanisms for sharing benefits globally, and explore new ways of international cooperation. The goal is to give more impetus to economic globalization and remove impediments as much as we could.
为此，我愿提出以下几点倡议。
For that to happen, I want to propose the following:
第一，共建开放合作的世界经济。当今世界，全球价值链、供应链深入发展，你中有我、我中有你，各国经济融合是大势所趋。距离近了，交往多了，难免会有磕磕碰碰。面对矛盾和摩擦，协商合作才是正道。只要平等相待、互谅互让，就没有破解不了的难题。我们应该坚持以开放求发展，深化交流合作，坚持“拉手”而不是“松手”，坚持“拆墙”而不是“筑墙”，坚决反对保护主义、单边主义，不断削减贸易壁垒，推动全球价值链、供应链更加完善，共同培育市场需求。
First, let us work together to build an open world economy through cooperation. As global value and supply chains continue to develop, countries are inter-connected with each other, and integration of their economy is the order of the day. Distances between countries are getting shorter, and interactions among countries are growing, hence the probability of differences and frictions. The right solution lies in consultation and cooperation. All problems could be settled in the spirit of equality, mutual understanding and accommodation. We need to promote development through opening-up and deepen exchanges and cooperation among us. We need to “join hands” with each other instead of “letting go” of each other’s hands. We need to “tear down walls”, not to “erect walls”. We need to stand firm against protectionism and unilateralism. We need to continually bring down trade barriers, optimize global value and supply chains, and jointly foster market demand.
第二，共建开放创新的世界经济。创新发展是引领世界经济持续发展的必然选择。当前，新一轮科技革命和产业变革正处在实现重大突破的历史关口。各国应该加强创新合作，推动科技同经济深度融合，加强创新成果共享，努力打破制约知识、技术、人才等创新要素流动的壁垒，支持企业自主开展技术交流合作，让创新源泉充分涌流。为了更好运用知识的创造以造福人类，我们应该共同加强知识产权保护，而不是搞知识封锁，制造甚至扩大科技鸿沟。
Second, let us work together to build an open world economy with innovation. Innovation-driven development is essential to sustained growth of the world economy. What we are seeing is a new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation. It has reached a historic juncture when major breakthroughs are within sight. Countries need to step up cooperation in innovation. We need to facilitate integration of science and technology with economic growth, and increase the sharing of innovation results. We need to remove barriers that hamper the flow of knowledge, technology, talents and other factors of innovation, and support our businesses in technical exchanges and cooperation on their own accord. This is a way to unleash the potential for innovation. And, to benefit mankind with the better use of knowledge, we need to tighten the protection of intellectual property. The least desirable is for us to stifle the flow of knowledge, or to create or even widen the technology divide among us.
第三，共建开放共享的世界经济。我们应该谋求包容互惠的发展前景，共同维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际秩序，坚持多边贸易体制的核心价值和基本原则，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。我们应该落实《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》，加大对最不发达国家支持力度，让发展成果惠及更多国家和民众。
Third, let us work together to build an open world economy for mutual benefits. We need to work toward the vision of inclusive and mutually beneficial development. We need to work together to safeguard the international order underpinned by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, uphold the core values and basic principles of the multilateral trading system, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced, and beneficial to all. We need to work in real earnest to implement the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and increase support for the Least Developed Countries so that the benefits of development will reach more countries and peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
站在新的历史起点，中国开放的大门只会越开越大。中国共产党刚刚举行了十九届四中全会，制定了关于坚持和完善中国特色社会主义制度、推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化若干重大问题的决定，其中包括很多深化改革、扩大开放的重要举措。我们将坚持对外开放的基本国策，坚持以开放促改革、促发展、促创新，持续推进更高水平的对外开放。
Standing at a new historical starting point, China will open its door only wider to the world. The Communist Party of China has just concluded the fourth plenary session of the 19th Central Committee. A decision has been made to further uphold and improve the socialist system with Chinese characteristics and to modernize the country’s system and capacity for governance. That included a host of significant measures to deepen reform and opening-up. China will adhere to its fundamental state policy of opening-up and stay committed to opening-up to promote reform, development and innovation. This will bring about opening-up at an even higher level.
第一，继续扩大市场开放。中国有近14亿人口，中等收入群体规模全球最大，市场规模巨大、潜力巨大，前景不可限量。中国老百姓有一句话，叫作“世界那么大，我想去看看”。在这里我要说，中国市场这么大，欢迎大家都来看看。中国将增强国内消费对经济发展的基础性作用，积极建设更加活跃的国内市场，为中国经济发展提供支撑，为世界经济增长扩大空间。中国将更加重视进口的作用，进一步降低关税和制度性成本，培育一批进口贸易促进创新示范区，扩大对各国高质量产品和服务的进口。中国将推动进口和出口、货物贸易和服务贸易、双边贸易和双向投资、贸易和产业协调发展，促进国际国内要素有序自由流动、资源高效配置、市场深度融合。
First, China will continue to open up its market. China has a population of 1.4 billion. Its middle-income population is the biggest in the world. The huge Chinese market points to a potential that is simply unlimited. The Chinese people often say, “The world is a big place, and I want to see just more of it.” What I want to say to you today is that the Chinese market is such a big one that you should all come and see what it has to offer. China will better leverage the fundamental role of domestic consumption in economic development and foster a more robust domestic market to boost growth at home and create more room for global growth. China will give greater importance to import. We will continue to lower tariffs and institutional transaction costs, develop demonstration zones to promote import trade by creative means, and import more high-quality goods and services from around the world. We will take steps to promote balanced development of both imports and exports, of trade in goods and services, of two-way trade and investment, and of trade and industry. This way, we will ensure a free yet orderly flow of both international and domestic factors of production, improve the efficient allocation of resources, and deepen integration of markets.
第二，继续完善开放格局。中国对外开放是全方位、全领域的，正在加快推动形成全面开放新格局。中国将继续鼓励自由贸易试验区大胆试、大胆闯，加快推进海南自由贸易港建设，就是我们的海南省，全省建成自由贸易港。打造开放新高地。中国将继续推动京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展、长三角区域一体化发展、粤港澳大湾区建设，并将制定黄河流域生态保护和高质量发展新的国家战略，增强开放联动效应。中国有两大母亲河，一个叫长江，一个叫黄河。我们将在两河流域进一步科学布局。
Second, China will continue to optimize its opening-up structure. China’s opening-up is all-dimensional and all-sectoral. A new structure of all-out opening-up is quick in the making. China will continue to encourage bold trials and experiments in pilot free trade zones and quicken the development of the Hainan Free Trade Port as pacesetters of opening-up in China. China will continue to implement integrated regional development strategies for the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, the Yangtze River Economic Belt, the Yangtze River Delta region, and the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, and draw up a new national strategy for environmental protection and high-quality development in the Yellow River basin. The purpose is to seek greater synergy of opening-up among different parts of the country.
第三，继续优化营商环境。营商环境是企业生存发展的土壤。今年10月24日，世界银行发表《2020营商环境报告》，中国营商环境排名由46位上升到31位，提升15位。上个月，中国公布了《优化营商环境条例》。今后，中国将继续针对制约经济发展的突出矛盾，在关键环节和重要领域加快改革步伐，以国家治理体系和治理能力现代化为高水平开放、高质量发展提供制度保障。中国将不断完善市场化、法治化、国际化的营商环境，放宽外资市场准入，继续缩减负面清单，完善投资促进和保护、信息报告等制度。中国将营造尊重知识价值的环境，完善知识产权保护法律体系，大力强化相关执法，增强知识产权民事和刑事司法保护力度。
Third, China will continue to improve the business environment. Proper business environment provides the necessary condition for enterprises to survive and thrive. On 24 October, the World Bank released its Doing Business Report 2020, which ranks China 31st, up by15 places from last year’s ranking of 46th. Last month, China issued a regulation on optimizing the business environment. Going forward, China will continue to remove major constraints on economic development, gear up reforms regarding key links and areas, and modernize the system and capacity for governance as an institutional support for high-standard opening-up and high-quality development. China will continue to foster an enabling business environment that is based on market principles, governed by law, and up to international standards. We will give foreign investments greater market access to more sectors, shorten the negative list further, and improve institutions for investment promotion and protection and for information reporting. With regard to IP protection, we will cultivate an environment that appreciates the value of knowledge, improve the legal framework, step up law enforcement, and enhance protection through both civil and criminal justice systems.
第四，继续深化多双边合作。中国是国际合作的倡导者和多边主义的支持者。中国支持对世界贸易组织进行必要改革，让世界贸易组织在扩大开放、促进发展方面发挥更大作用，增强多边贸易体制的权威性和有效性。今天下午，中方将主办世贸组织小型部长会议。我们期待各方坦诚交换意见，共同采取行动，为完善全球经济治理贡献正能量。我高兴地得知，昨天区域全面经济伙伴关系协定15个成员国已经整体上结束谈判，希望协定能够早日签署生效。中国愿同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，加快中欧投资协定、中日韩自由贸易协定、中国－海合会自由贸易协定谈判进程。中国将积极参与联合国、二十国集团、亚太经合组织、金砖国家等机制合作，共同推动经济全球化向前发展。
Fourth, China will continue to deepen multilateral and bilateral cooperation. China is a champion for international cooperation and a supporter of multilateralism. China supports necessary reforms to the
WTO so that the organization can play a bigger role in promoting openness and development and the multilateral trading regime can be more authoritative and effective. Later this afternoon, the Chinese side will host an Informal WTO Ministerial Meeting. We look forward to candid exchanges that will lead to joint actions to improve global economic governance. I am happy to note that yesterday, 15 countries taking part in the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) concluded text-based negotiations, and I hope the agreement will be signed and enter into force at an early date. China will be happy to conclude high-standard free trade agreements with more countries. We will speed up negotiations on a China-EU investment agreement, a China-Japan-ROK FTA, and a China-Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) FTA. We will stay actively engaged in cooperation within the United Nations, the G20, APEC, and BRICS to move economic globalization forward.
第五，继续推进共建“一带一路”。目前，中国已经同137个国家和30个国际组织签署197份共建“一带一路”合作文件。中国将秉持共商共建共享原则，坚持开放、绿色、廉洁理念，努力实现高标准、惠民生、可持续目标，推动共建“一带一路”高质量发展。
Fifth, China will continue to advance Belt and Road cooperation. To date, China has signed 197 documents on Belt and Road cooperation with 137 countries and 30 international organizations. China will follow the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution, and shared benefits, the philosophy of open, green, and clean cooperation, and a high-standard, people-centered, and sustainable approach to promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
面向未来，中国将坚持新发展理念，继续实施创新驱动发展战略，着力培育和壮大新动能，不断推动转方式、调结构、增动力，推动经济高质量发展，为世界经济增长带来新的更多机遇。
Looking forward, China will follow the new development approach and the strategy of innovation-driven development, and redouble our efforts to foster new growth drivers by shifting the growth model, improving the economic structure, and creating new growth momentum. We believe such efforts will not only bring China high-quality development but also new growth opportunities for the global economy.
我相信，中国经济发展前景一定会更加光明，也必然更加光明。从历史的长镜头来看，中国发展是属于全人类进步的伟大事业。中国将张开双臂，为各国提供更多市场机遇、投资机遇、增长机遇，实现共同发展。
I have faith in the bright prospects of China’s economic development. China’s development, viewed through the lens of history, is an integral part of the lofty cause of human progress. China will reach out its arms and offer countries in the world more opportunities of market, investment and growth. Together, we can achieve development for all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中华文明历来主张天下大同、协和万邦。希望大家共同努力，不断为推动建设开放型世界经济、构建人类命运共同体作出积极贡献！
The Chinese civilization has always valued peace under heaven and harmony among nations. Let us all work in that spirit and contribute to an open global economy and to a community with a shared future for mankind.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
