30. 习近平在亚洲文明对话大会开幕式上的主旨演讲
深化文明交流互鉴　共建亚洲命运共同体
Deepening Exchanges and Mutual Learning Among Civilizations For an Asian Community with a Shared Future
——在亚洲文明对话大会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2019年5月15日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations
Beijing, 15 May 2019 
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑、国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各位嘉宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
在这个草木生长的美好季节，来自亚洲47个国家和五大洲的各方嘉宾，为深化文明交流互鉴共聚一堂，共襄盛举。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对亚洲文明对话大会的召开，表示诚挚的祝贺！对各位嘉宾的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！
In this lovely season of thriving green, I am delighted to join you, distinguished guests from 47 Asian countries and five continents, in a dialogue on deepening exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations. On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I extend sincere congratulations on the opening of the Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations and a very warm welcome to all of you!
当前，世界多极化、经济全球化、文化多样化、社会信息化深入发展，人类社会充满希望。同时，国际形势的不稳定性不确定性更加突出，人类面临的全球性挑战更加严峻，需要世界各国齐心协力、共同应对。
The world today is moving toward greater multi-polarity, economic globalization and cultural diversity, and is becoming increasingly information-oriented. All this points to promising prospects for the future. Meanwhile, instability and uncertainties are mounting and the global challenges faced by humanity are becoming ever more daunting, calling for joint responses from countries around the world.
应对共同挑战、迈向美好未来，既需要经济科技力量，也需要文化文明力量。亚洲文明对话大会，为促进亚洲及世界各国文明开展平等对话、交流互鉴、相互启迪提供了一个新的平台。
To meet our common challenges and create a better future for all, we look to culture and civilization to play their role, which is as important as the role played by economy, science and technology. The Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations is convened just for this purpose, as it creates a new platform for civilizations in Asia and beyond to engage in dialogue and exchanges on an equal footing to facilitate mutual learning.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
亚洲是人类最早的定居地之一，也是人类文明的重要发祥地。亚洲地大物博、山河秀美，在世界三分之一的陆地上居住着全球三分之二的人口，47个国家、1000多个民族星罗棋布。从公元前数千年起，生活在底格里斯河－幼发拉底河、印度河－恒河、黄河－长江等流域的人们，开始耕耘灌溉、铸器造皿、建设家园。一代又一代亚洲先民历经岁月洗礼，把生产生活实践镌刻成悠久历史、积淀成深厚文明。广袤富饶的平原，碧波荡漾的水乡，辽阔壮美的草原，浩瀚无垠的沙漠，奔腾不息的江海，巍峨挺拔的山脉，承载和滋润了多彩的亚洲文明。
Asia is home to one of the earliest human settlements and an important cradle of human civilizations. This vast and beautiful continent covers a third of the earth's land mass and has two-thirds of the world's population. It has more than 1,000 ethnic groups living in 47 countries. For several thousand years before the Common Era, our forefathers living along the Tigris and the Euphrates, the Indus and the Ganges, the Yellow River and the Yangtze, tilled and irrigated the land, made tools and utensils, and built homes to live in. Generation after generation, our ancestors in Asia, with their tireless endeavors, created a time-honored history and profound and rich civilizations. Our vast and fertile plains, beautiful river basins, large steppes, immense deserts, mighty rivers and oceans, and lofty mountains have nourished and enriched diverse and colorful civilizations across Asia.
在数千年发展历程中，亚洲人民创造了辉煌的文明成果。《诗经》、《论语》、《塔木德》、《一千零一夜》、《梨俱吠陀》、《源氏物语》等名篇经典，楔形文字、地图、玻璃、阿拉伯数字、造纸术、印刷术等发明创造，长城、麦加大清真寺、泰姬陵、吴哥窟等恢宏建筑……都是人类文明的宝贵财富。各种文明在这片土地上交相辉映，谱写了亚洲文明发展史诗。
In building our civilizations over the course of several millennia, we the people of Asia have made splendid achievements. I think of literary classics such as The Book of Songs, The Analects of Confucius, The Talmud, One Thousand and One Nights, The Rigveda and Genji Monogatari; of inventions such as the cuneiform script, maps, glass, Arabic numerals, paper making and printing techniques; and of majestic structures like the Great Wall, the Great Mosque of Mecca, Taj Mahal and Angkor Wat. They are all invaluable assets of human civilization. Through interactions on this continent, Asian civilizations have enriched each other and written an epic of development.
亚洲先人们早就开始了文明交流互鉴。丝绸之路、茶叶之路、香料之路等古老商路，助推丝绸、茶叶、陶瓷、香料、绘画雕塑等风靡亚洲各国，记录着亚洲先人们交往交流、互通有无的文明对话。现在，“一带一路”、“两廊一圈”、“欧亚经济联盟”等拓展了文明交流互鉴的途径，各国在科技、教育、文化、卫生、民间交往等领域的合作蓬勃开展，亚洲文明也在自身内部及同世界文明的交流互鉴中发展壮大。
Our forefathers in Asia have long engaged in inter-civilizational exchanges and mutual learning. The ancient trade routes, notably the Silk Road, the Tea Road and the Spice Road, brought silk, tea, porcelain, spices, paintings and sculpture to all corners of Asia, and witnessed inter-civilizational dialogue in the form of trade and cultural interflow. Today, the Belt and Road Initiative, together with the Two Corridors and One Belt, the Eurasian Economic Union and other initiatives, have greatly expanded inter-civilizational exchanges and mutual learning. Cooperation among nations in science, technology, education, culture, health and people-to-people exchanges are thriving like never before. Thanks to exchanges and mutual learning among themselves and with other civilizations in the world, Asian civilizations have grown from strength to strength.
璀璨的亚洲文明，为世界文明发展史书写了浓墨重彩的篇章，人类文明因亚洲而更加绚烂多姿。从宗教到哲学、从道德到法律、从文学到绘画、从戏剧到音乐、从城市到乡村，亚洲形成了覆盖广泛的世俗礼仪、写下了传承千年的不朽巨著、留下了精湛深邃的艺术瑰宝、形成了种类多样的制度成果，为世界提供了丰富的文明选择。
The great Asian civilizations have a special place in the annals of world civilizations, and they have added to the diversity of human civilizations. Think of what Asia stands to offer in terms of religion, philosophy, ethic code, law, literature, painting, drama, music, and even the building of towns and villages. They speak volumes for Asia's proud achievements: extensive systems of social customs, immortal classics that have endured for millennia, the fine pool of exquisite art, and diverse institutions, among others. All these offer rich choices for civilizations the world over to draw on.
回顾历史、展望世界，我们应该增强文明自信，在先辈们铸就的光辉成就的基础上，坚持同世界其他文明交流互鉴，努力续写亚洲文明新辉煌。
As we review our past and look beyond Asia, we should have greater confidence in our civilizations. We may build on the rich heritage of our forefathers, stay engaged with other civilizations and increase mutual learning. By doing so, we will add new glory to Asian civilizations.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
亚洲各国山水相连、人文相亲，有着相似的历史境遇、相同的梦想追求。面向未来，我们应该把握大势、顺应潮流，努力把亚洲人民对美好生活的向往变成现实。
We Asian countries are closely connected and share a natural bond of affinity. We went through similar historical trials and hold the same dream for the future. Going forward, we need to see where the world is going, ride on the trend of the times and turn our people's longing for a better life into reality.
——亚洲人民期待一个和平安宁的亚洲。维护和平是每个国家都应该肩负起来的责任。没有和平，冲突不断甚至战火纷飞，经济增长、民生改善、社会稳定、人民往来等都会沦为空谈。亚洲各国人民希望远离恐惧，实现安居乐业、普遍安全，希望各国互尊互信、和睦相处，广泛开展跨国界、跨时空、跨文明的交往活动，共同维护比金子还珍贵的和平时光。
- We Asian people hope to see peace and stability across Asia. Upholding peace is the responsibility of every country. When peace is interrupted by conflict or war, economic growth, decent lives, social stability and people-to-people exchanges will all be out of the question. We the people of Asian countries wish to live and work in content and security free from fear. We hope that all countries will respect and trust each other, live in harmony, and interact with each other in a manner that transcends national boundaries, time and space, as well as the difference between civilizations. We should work together and jointly safeguard peace, something that is even more precious than gold.
——亚洲人民期待一个共同繁荣的亚洲。经济发展是文明存续的有力支撑，繁荣富强是国家进步的重要基石。亚洲一些民众特别是妇女儿童正忍受着贫困、饥饿、疾病的折磨，这样的局面必须改变。亚洲各国人民希望远离贫困、富足安康，希望各国合力推进开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，共同消除一些国家民众依然面临的贫穷落后，共同为孩子们创造衣食无忧的生活，让幸福和欢乐走进每一个家庭。
- We Asian people hope to see common prosperity in Asia. Economic growth sustains a civilization, and prosperity underpins the progress of a nation. In some parts of Asia, people, women and children in particular, are still suffering from poverty, hunger and disease. This must change. We Asian people long for decent lives free of poverty. We hope that countries will work together to promote economic globalization and make it more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. Doing so will enable us to eradicate poverty and backwardness that still plague people in some countries. It will make life carefree for our children and bring happiness to all families.
——亚洲人民期待一个开放融通的亚洲。亚洲近几十年快速发展，一条十分重要的经验就是敞开大门，主动融入世界经济发展潮流。如果各国重新回到一个个自我封闭的孤岛，人类文明就将因老死不相往来而丧失生机活力。亚洲各国人民希望远离封闭、融会通达，希望各国秉持开放精神，推进政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通，共同构建亚洲命运共同体、人类命运共同体。
- We Asian people hope to see an open and better-connected Asia. Asia's rapid development over the past decades shows that it is important to open one's door to the outside world and ride on the trend of global economic development. If countries choose to close their doors and hide behind them, human civilizations would be cut off from each other and lose all vitality. We Asian people hope that all countries will reject self-exclusion, embrace integration, uphold openness and promote policy, infrastructure, trade, financial and people-to-people connectivity. This way, we can jointly foster a community with a shared future for both us Asians and all humanity.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
文明因多样而交流，因交流而互鉴，因互鉴而发展。我们要加强世界上不同国家、不同民族、不同文化的交流互鉴，夯实共建亚洲命运共同体、人类命运共同体的人文基础。为此，我愿提出4点主张。
Diversity spurs interaction among civilizations, which in turn promotes mutual learning and their further development. We need to promote exchanges and mutual learning among countries, nations and cultures around the world, and strengthen popular support for jointly building a community with a shared future for both Asia and humanity as a whole. To that end, I believe it is imperative that we act in the following ways:
第一，坚持相互尊重、平等相待。每一种文明都扎根于自己的生存土壤，凝聚着一个国家、一个民族的非凡智慧和精神追求，都有自己存在的价值。人类只有肤色语言之别，文明只有姹紫嫣红之别，但绝无高低优劣之分。认为自己的人种和文明高人一等，执意改造甚至取代其他文明，在认识上是愚蠢的，在做法上是灾难性的！如果人类文明变得只有一个色调、一个模式了，那这个世界就太单调了，也太无趣了！我们应该秉持平等和尊重，摒弃傲慢和偏见，加深对自身文明和其他文明差异性的认知，推动不同文明交流对话、和谐共生。
First, we need to respect each other and treat each other as equals. All civilizations are rooted in their unique cultural environment. Each embodies the wisdom and vision of a country or nation, and each is valuable for being uniquely its own. Civilizations only vary from each other, just as human beings are different only in terms of skin color and the language used. No civilization is superior over others. The thought that one's own race and civilization are superior and the inclination to remold or replace other civilizations are just stupid. To act them out will only bring catastrophic consequences. If human civilizations are reduced to only one single color or one single model, the world would become a stereotype and too dull a place to live in. What we need is to respect each other as equals and say no to hubris and prejudice. We need to deepen understanding of the difference between one's own civilization and others', and work to promote interaction, dialogue and harmony among civilizations.
我访问过世界上许多地方，最吸引我的就是韵味不同的文明，如中亚的古城撒马尔罕、埃及的卢克索神庙、新加坡的圣淘沙、泰国的曼谷玉佛寺、希腊的雅典卫城等。中国愿同各国开展亚洲文化遗产保护行动，为更好传承文明提供必要支撑。
In the many places I have visited around the world, what fascinates me the most is civilizations in their rich diversity. I cannot but think of the Central Asian city of Samarkand, the Luxor Temple in Egypt, Sentosa in Singapore, Wat Phra Kaew in Bangkok, and the Acropolis in Athens, to mention just a few. China is ready to work with other countries to protect Asian cultural heritage and better preserve and sustain our civilizations.
第二，坚持美人之美、美美与共。每一种文明都是美的结晶，都彰显着创造之美。一切美好的事物都是相通的。人们对美好事物的向往，是任何力量都无法阻挡的！各种文明本没有冲突，只是要有欣赏所有文明之美的眼睛。我们既要让本国文明充满勃勃生机，又要为他国文明发展创造条件，让世界文明百花园群芳竞艳。
Second, we need to uphold the beauty of each civilization and the diversity of civilizations in the world. Each civilization is the crystallization of human creation, and each is beautiful in its own way. The aspiration for all that is beautiful is a common pursuit of humanity that nothing can hold back. Civilizations don't have to clash with each other; what is needed are eyes to see the beauty in all civilizations. We should keep our own civilizations dynamic and create conditions for other civilizations to flourish. Together we can make the garden of world civilizations colorful and vibrant.
文明之美集中体现在哲学、社会科学等经典著作和文学、音乐、影视剧等文艺作品之中。现在，大量外国优秀文化产品进入中国，许多中国优秀文化产品走向世界。中国愿同有关国家一道，实施亚洲经典著作互译计划和亚洲影视交流合作计划，帮助人们加深对彼此文化的理解和欣赏，为展示和传播文明之美打造交流互鉴平台。
The beauty of a civilization finds concrete expression in the classic works of philosophy and social sciences and works of literature, music, film and TV drama. Now, a large number of outstanding cultural works from other countries are brought into China, and a lot of fine Chinese cultural products are introduced to other countries. China is happy to launch initiatives with relevant countries to translate Asian classics both from and into Chinese and promote film and TV exchanges and cooperation in Asia. This will help people in Asia better understand and appreciate each other's cultures and build a platform of exchange and mutual learning for the best of Asian civilizations to spread and be known to more in the world.
第三，坚持开放包容、互学互鉴。一切生命有机体都需要新陈代谢，否则生命就会停止。文明也是一样，如果长期自我封闭，必将走向衰落。交流互鉴是文明发展的本质要求。只有同其他文明交流互鉴、取长补短，才能保持旺盛生命活力。文明交流互鉴应该是对等的、平等的，应该是多元的、多向的，而不应该是强制的、强迫的，不应该是单一的、单向的。我们应该以海纳百川的宽广胸怀打破文化交往的壁垒，以兼收并蓄的态度汲取其他文明的养分，促进亚洲文明在交流互鉴中共同前进。
Third, we need to stay open and inclusive and draw on each other's strengths. All living organisms in the human body must renew themselves through metabolism; otherwise, life would come to an end. The same is true for civilizations. Long-term self-isolation will cause a civilization to decline, while exchanges and mutual learning will sustain its development. A civilization can flourish only through exchanges and mutual learning with other civilizations. Such exchanges and mutual learning should be reciprocal, equal-footed, diversified and multi-dimensional; they should not be coercive, imposed, one-dimensional or one-way. We need to be broad-minded and strive to remove all barriers to cultural exchanges. We need to be inclusive and always seek nourishment from other civilizations to promote the common development of Asian civilizations through exchanges and mutual learning.
人是文明交流互鉴最好的载体。深化人文交流互鉴是消除隔阂和误解、促进民心相知相通的重要途径。这些年来，中国同各国一道，在教育、文化、体育、卫生等领域搭建了众多合作平台，开辟了广泛合作渠道。中国愿同各国加强青少年、民间团体、地方、媒体等各界交流，打造智库交流合作网络，创新合作模式，推动各种形式的合作走深走实，为推动文明交流互鉴创造条件。
People are the best bridge for exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations. Closer people-to-people exchanges and mutual learning, for that matter, is a sure way to eliminate estrangement and misunderstanding and promote mutual understanding among nations. Over the years, China has, in collaboration with other countries, established many platforms and channels for cooperation in education, culture, sports, health and other fields. China will work with other countries to step up exchanges among the youth, non-governmental organizations, subnational entities and media organizations, create a network of exchanges and cooperation between think tanks, explore new models of cooperation, and deliver more solid outcomes in diverse forms. Such efforts will boost exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations.
第四，坚持与时俱进、创新发展。文明永续发展，既需要薪火相传、代代守护，更需要顺时应势、推陈出新。世界文明历史揭示了一个规律：任何一种文明都要与时偕行，不断吸纳时代精华。我们应该用创新增添文明发展动力、激活文明进步的源头活水，不断创造出跨越时空、富有永恒魅力的文明成果。
Fourth, we need to advance with the times and explore new ground in development. For a civilization to endure, efforts must be made to keep it alive and build on its heritage from one generation to the next. More importantly, a civilization needs to adapt itself to the changing times and break new ground. The history of world civilizations tells us that every civilization needs to advance with the times and take in the best of its age in order to develop itself. We need to come up with new ideas to add impetus and inspiration to the development of our civilizations. With these efforts, we will deliver achievements for our civilizations to transcend time and space and have a lasting appeal.
激发人们创新创造活力，最直接的方法莫过于走入不同文明，发现别人的优长，启发自己的思维。2018年，中国国内居民出境超过1.6亿人次，入境游客超过1.4亿人次，这是促进中外文明交流互鉴的重要力量。中国愿同各国实施亚洲旅游促进计划，为促进亚洲经济发展、增进亚洲人民友谊贡献更大力量。
To spur people's innovation and creativity, the best way is to come into contact with different civilizations, see the strengths of others and draw upon them. Last year, Chinese tourists made over 160 million overseas trips and more than 140 million foreign tourists visited China. These visits played an important role in promoting exchanges and mutual learning between China and the rest of the world. In this connection, China will work with other countries to implement a plan to promote tourism in Asia. This will further boost economic development in Asia and deepen friendship among the Asian people.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中华文明是亚洲文明的重要组成部分。自古以来，中华文明在继承创新中不断发展，在应时处变中不断升华，积淀着中华民族最深沉的精神追求，是中华民族生生不息、发展壮大的丰厚滋养。中国的造纸术、火药、印刷术、指南针、天文历法、哲学思想、民本理念等在世界上影响深远，有力推动了人类文明发展进程。
Being an inseparable part of Asian civilizations, Chinese civilization has, since its early days, evolved and grown by drawing on its past achievement, exploring new ground and adapting to changes. It represents the profound pursuit of the Chinese nation and provides a rich source of strength for its lasting development. Chinese inventions such as paper making, gunpowder, printing and the compass as well as China's astronomical knowledge, calendar system, philosophy and the people-centered doctrine have all had a global impact and propelled the development of human civilizations.
中华文明是在同其他文明不断交流互鉴中形成的开放体系。从历史上的佛教东传、“伊儒会通”，到近代以来的“西学东渐”、新文化运动、马克思主义和社会主义思想传入中国，再到改革开放以来全方位对外开放，中华文明始终在兼收并蓄中历久弥新。亲仁善邻、协和万邦是中华文明一贯的处世之道，惠民利民、安民富民是中华文明鲜明的价值导向，革故鼎新、与时俱进是中华文明永恒的精神气质，道法自然、天人合一是中华文明内在的生存理念。
Chinese civilization, as an inclusive and integrated whole, has become what it is today through constant interactions with other civilizations. It has been enriched by the introduction of Buddhism and the confluence of Islam and Confucianism in the old days, and by the introduction of Western learning, the launch of the New Culture Movement and the introduction of Marxism and socialism in modern times. All-round opening-up of the country, starting with the reform and opening-up program, has added to its vitality today. For Chinese civilization, amity and good neighborliness is the principle guiding our interactions with other countries; and to deliver prosperity and security to the people is the overarching goal, to keep pace with the times through reform and innovation the abiding commitment, and to achieve harmony between man and nature the underlying philosophy.
今日之中国，不仅是中国之中国，而且是亚洲之中国、世界之中国。未来之中国，必将以更加开放的姿态拥抱世界、以更有活力的文明成就贡献世界。
China today is more than the country itself; it is very much a part of Asia and the world. In the time to come, China will open its arms wider to embrace the world and contribute the dynamic achievements of Chinese civilization to a better world in the future.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
这次亚洲文明对话大会议题广泛、内容丰富，希望大家集思广益、畅所欲言，提出真知灼见，共同创造亚洲文明和世界文明的美好未来！
The Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations has a wide-ranging agenda, and I look forward to your keen perspectives and insights. By putting our heads together, we will create an even better tomorrow for civilizations in Asia and beyond!
最后，预祝亚洲文明对话大会圆满成功！
To conclude, I wish this conference every success!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.