138. 习近平在博鳌亚洲论坛2013年会上的主旨演讲
尊敬的各位元首、政府首脑、议长、国际组织负责人、部长，博鳌亚洲论坛理事会各位成员，各位来宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们。
Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government, Speakers of Parliament, Heads of International Organizations, Ministers, Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
椰风暖人，海阔天高。在这美好的季节里，同大家相聚在美丽的海南岛，参加博鳌亚洲论坛2013年年会，我感到十分高兴。首先，我谨代表中国政府和人民，并以我个人的名义，向各位朋友的到来，表示诚挚的欢迎！对年会的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！
In this balmy season with clear sky and warm, coconut-scented breeze, I am so glad to meet all of you at the Annual Conference 2013 of the Boao Forum for Asia here in Hainan, a picturesque island embraced by the vast ocean.
Let me begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and also in my own name, a heartfelt welcome to you and warm congratulations on the opening of the Annual Conference of the Boao Forum.
12年来，博鳌亚洲论坛日益成为具有全球影响的重要论坛。在中国文化中，每12年是一个生肖循环，照此说来，博鳌亚洲论坛正处在一个新的起点上，希望能更上一层楼。本届年会以“革新、责任、合作：亚洲寻求共同发展”为主题，很有现实意义。相信大家能够充分发表远见卓识，共商亚洲和世界发展大计，为促进本地区乃至全球和平、稳定、繁荣贡献智慧和力量。
In the past 12 years since its birth, the Boao Forum for Asia has become an important forum with growing global influence. In the Chinese culture, 12 years form a zodiac cycle. In this sense, the Boao Forum has reached a new starting point and I hope it will scale an even greater height.
The theme of the current annual conference, namely, "Asia Seeking Development for All: Restructuring, Responsibility and Cooperation", is a highly relevant one. I hope you will engage in an in-depth discussion on promoting development in Asia and beyond and thus contributing, with your vision and commitment, to peace, stability and prosperity in Asia and the world at large.
当前，国际形势继续发生深刻复杂变化。世界各国相互联系日益紧密、相互依存日益加深，遍布全球的众多发展中国家、几十亿人口正在努力走向现代化，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流更加强劲。同时，天下仍很不太平，发展问题依然突出，世界经济进入深度调整期，整体复苏艰难曲折，国际金融领域仍然存在较多风险，各种形式的保护主义上升，各国调整经济结构面临不少困难，全球治理机制有待进一步完善。实现各国共同发展，依然任重而道远。
The world today is experiencing profound and complex changes. Countries have become increasingly inter-connected and inter-dependent. Several billion people in a large number of developing countries are embracing modernization. The trend of the times, namely, peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit, is gaining momentum.
On the other hand, our world is far from peaceful. Development remains a major challenge; the global economy has entered a period of profound readjustment, and its recovery remains elusive. The international financial sector is fraught with risks, protectionism of various forms is on the rise, countries still face many difficulties in adjusting economic structure, and the global governance mechanisms call for improvement. Achieving common development for all countries remains an uphill battle.
亚洲是当今世界最具发展活力和潜力的地区之一，亚洲发展同其他各大洲发展息息相关。亚洲国家积极探索适合本国情况的发展道路，在实现自身发展的同时有力促进了世界发展。亚洲与世界其他地区共克时艰，合作应对国际金融危机，成为拉动世界经济复苏和增长的重要引擎，近年来对世界经济增长的贡献率已超过50%，给世界带来了信心。亚洲同世界其他地区的区域次区域合作展现出勃勃生机和美好前景。
Asia is one of the most dynamic and most promising regions in the world, and its development is closely connected with the development of other continents. The Asian countries have energetically explored development paths suited to their national conditions and greatly boosted global development through their own development. Working side by side with the rest of the world in time of difficulty to tackle the international financial crisis, Asia has emerged as an important engine driving world economic recovery and growth. In recent years, Asia has contributed to over 50 percent of global growth, instilling much needed confidence in the world. What is more, Asia's cooperation with other regions of the world at regional and sub-regional levels has great vitality and promising prospects.
当然，我们也清醒地看到，亚洲要谋求更大发展、更好推动本地区和世界其他地区共同发展，依然面临不少困难和挑战，还需要爬一道道的坡、过一道道的坎。
But we should also be keenly aware that Asia still faces many difficulties and challenges in boosting both its own development and joint development with other regions. The road ahead remains a bumpy and twisting one.
亚洲发展需要乘势而上、转型升级。对亚洲来说，发展仍然是头等大事，发展仍然是解决面临的突出矛盾和问题的关键，迫切需要转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构，提高经济发展质量和效益，在此基础上不断提高人民生活水平。
Asia needs to transform and upgrade its development model in keeping with the trend of the times. Sustaining development is still of paramount importance to Asia, because only development holds the key to solving major problems and difficulties it faces. It is important that we should shift the growth model, adjust the economic structure, make development more cost effective and make life better for our people.
亚洲稳定需要共同呵护、破解难题。亚洲稳定面临着新的挑战，热点问题此起彼伏，传统安全威胁和非传统安全威胁都有所表现，实现本地区长治久安需要地区国家增强互信、携手努力。
We need to make concerted efforts to resolve major difficulties to ensure stability in Asia. Stability in Asia now faces new challenges, as hotspot issues keep emerging, and both traditional and non-traditional security threats exist. The Asian countries need to increase mutual trust and work together to ensure durable peace and stability in our region.
亚洲合作需要百尺竿头、更进一步。加强亚洲地区合作的机制和倡议很多，各方面想法和主张丰富多样，协调各方面利益诉求、形成能够保障互利共赢的机制需要更好增进理解、凝聚共识、充实内容、深化合作。
We need to build on past success and make new progress in promoting cooperation in Asia. There are many mechanisms and initiatives for enhancing cooperation in Asia, and a lot of ideas on boosting such cooperation are being explored by various parties. What we need to do is to enhance mutual understanding, build consensus, and enrich and deepen cooperation so as to strike a balance among the interests of various parties and build mechanisms that bring benefits to all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
人类只有一个地球，各国共处一个世界。共同发展是持续发展的重要基础，符合各国人民长远利益和根本利益。我们生活在同一个地球村，应该牢固树立命运共同体意识，顺应时代潮流，把握正确方向，坚持同舟共济，推动亚洲和世界发展不断迈上新台阶。
Mankind has only one earth, and it is home to all countries. Common development, which is the very foundation of sustainable development, serves the long-term and fundamental interests of all the people in the world. As members of the same global village, we should foster a sense of community of common destiny, follow the trend of the times, keep to the right direction, stick together in time of difficulty and ensure that development in Asia and the rest of the world reaches new highs.
第一，勇于变革创新，为促进共同发展提供不竭动力。长期以来，各国各地区在保持稳定、促进发展方面形成了很多好经验好做法。对这些好经验好做法，要继续发扬光大。同时，世间万物，变动不居。“明者因时而变，知者随事而制。”要摒弃不合时宜的旧观念，冲破制约发展的旧框框，让各种发展活力充分迸发出来。要加大转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构力度，更加注重发展质量，更加注重改善民生。要稳定推进国际经济金融体系改革，完善全球治理机制，为世界经济健康稳定增长提供保障。亚洲历来具有自我变革活力，要勇做时代的弄潮儿，使亚洲变革和世界发展相互促进、相得益彰。
First, we should boldly break new ground so as to create an inexhaustible source of power for boosting common development. Over the years, many countries and regions have developed a lot of good practices in maintaining stability and promoting growth. We should continue such practices. However, nothing in the world remains constant, and as a Chinese saying goes, a wise man changes as time and event change. We should abandon the outdated mindset, break away from the old confines that fetter development and unleash all the potential for development. We should redouble efforts to shift the growth model and adjust the economic structure, raise the quality of development and make life better for the people. We should steadily advance the reform of the international economic and financial systems, improve global governance mechanisms and provide support to sound and stable global economic growth. Asia, with its long-standing capacity for adjusting to change, should ride on the waves of the times and make changes in Asia and global development reinforce and benefit each other.
第二，同心维护和平，为促进共同发展提供安全保障。和平是人民的永恒期望。和平犹如空气和阳光，受益而不觉，失之则难存。没有和平，发展就无从谈起。国家无论大小、强弱、贫富，都应该做和平的维护者和促进者，不能这边搭台、那边拆台，而应该相互补台、好戏连台。国际社会应该倡导综合安全、共同安全、合作安全的理念，使我们的地球村成为共谋发展的大舞台，而不是相互角力的竞技场，更不能为一己之私把一个地区乃至世界搞乱。各国交往频繁，磕磕碰碰在所难免，关键是要坚持通过对话协商与和平谈判，妥善解决矛盾分歧，维护相互关系发展大局。
Second, we should work together to uphold peace so as to provide security safeguard for boosting common development. Peace is the ever-lasting wish of our people. Peace, like air and sunshine, is hardly noticed when people are benefiting from it. But none of us can live without it. Without peace, development is out of the question. Countries, whether big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should all contribute their share to maintaining and enhancing peace. Rather than undercutting each other's efforts, countries should complement each other and work for joint progress. The international community should advocate the vision of comprehensive security, common security and cooperative security so as to turn our global village into a big stage for common development, rather than an arena where gladiators fight each other. And no one should be allowed to throw a region and even the whole world into chaos for selfish gains. With growing interaction among countries, it is inevitable that they encounter frictions here and there. What is important is that they should resolve differences through dialogue, consultation and peaceful negotiations in the larger interest of the sound growth of their relations.
第三，着力推进合作，为促进共同发展提供有效途径。“一花独放不是春，百花齐放春满园。”世界各国联系紧密、利益交融，要互通有无、优势互补，在追求本国利益时兼顾他国合理关切，在谋求自身发展中促进各国共同发展，不断扩大共同利益汇合点。要加强南南合作和南北对话，推动发展中国家和发达国家平衡发展，夯实世界经济长期稳定发展基础。要积极创造更多合作机遇，提高合作水平，让发展成果更好惠及各国人民，为促进世界经济增长多作贡献。
Third, we should boost cooperation as an effective vehicle for enhancing common development. As we often say in China, a single flower does not make spring, while one hundred flowers in full blossom bring spring to the garden. All countries in the world are closely linked and share converging interests. They should both pool and share their strengths. While pursuing its own interests, a country should accommodate the legitimate concerns of others. In pursuing their own development, countries should promote the common development of all and expand common interests among them. We should enhance South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue, promote balanced development of the developing and developed countries and consolidate the foundation for sustaining stable growth of the global economy. We need to work vigorously to create more cooperation opportunities, upgrade cooperation, and deliver more development dividends to our people and contribute more to global growth.
第四，坚持开放包容，为促进共同发展提供广阔空间。“海纳百川，有容乃大。”我们应该尊重各国自主选择社会制度和发展道路的权利，消除疑虑和隔阂，把世界多样性和各国差异性转化为发展活力和动力。我们要秉持开放精神，积极借鉴其他地区发展经验，共享发展资源，推进区域合作。进入新世纪10多年来，亚洲地区内贸易额从8000亿美元增长到3万亿美元，亚洲同世界其他地区贸易额从1.5万亿美元增长到4.8万亿美元，这表明亚洲合作是开放的，区域内合作和同其他地区合作并行不悖，大家都从合作中得到了好处。亚洲应该欢迎域外国家为本地区稳定和发展发挥建设性作用，同时，域外国家也应该尊重亚洲的多样性特点和已经形成的合作传统，形成亚洲发展同其他地区发展良性互动、齐头并进的良好态势。
Fourth, we should remain open and inclusive so as to create broad space for enhancing common development. The ocean is vast because it admits hundreds of rivers. We should respect the right of a country to independently choose its social system and development path, remove distrust and misgivings and turn the diversity of our world and difference among countries into dynamism and driving force for development. We should keep an open mind, draw upon development practices of other continents, share development resources and promote regional cooperation. During the first decade and more of the new century, trade within Asia has increased from $800 billion to $3 trillion, and its trade with other regions has grown from $1.5 trillion to $4.8 trillion. This shows that cooperation in Asia is open and it goes hand in hand with Asia's cooperation with other regions, and everyone has benefited from such cooperation. Asia should welcome non-Asian countries to play a constructive role in ensuring stability and development of the region. Likewise, the non-Asian countries should respect Asia's diversity and its long-standing tradition of cooperation. This will create a dynamic environment in which Asia and other regions enjoy mutually reinforcing progress.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！中国是亚洲和世界大家庭的重要成员。中国发展离不开亚洲和世界，亚洲和世界繁荣稳定也需要中国。
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,China is an important member of the Asian family and the global family. China cannot develop itself in isolation from the rest of Asia and the world. On their part, the rest of Asia and the world cannot enjoy prosperity and stability without China.
去年11月，中国共产党召开了第十八次全国代表大会，明确了中国今后一个时期的发展蓝图。我们的奋斗目标是，到2020年国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入在2010年的基础上翻一番，全面建成小康社会；到本世纪中叶建成富强民主文明和谐的社会主义现代化国家，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。展望未来，我们充满信心。
In November last year, the Communist Party of China held its 18th National Congress, which drew the blueprint for China's development in the years to come. The main goals we set for China are as follows: By 2020, China's GDP and per capita incomes for urban and rural residents will double the 2010 figures, and the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects will be completed. By the mid-21st century, China will be turned into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious; and the Chinese dream, namely, the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation, will be realized. Looking ahead, we are full of confidence in China's future.
我们也认识到，中国依然是世界上最大的发展中国家，中国发展仍面临着不少困难和挑战，要使全体中国人民都过上美好生活，还需要付出长期不懈的努力。我们将坚持改革开放不动摇，牢牢把握转变经济发展方式这条主线，集中精力把自己的事情办好，不断推进社会主义现代化建设。
On the other hand, we are aware that China remains the world's largest developing country, and it faces many difficulties and challenges on its road to progress. We need to make relentless efforts in the years ahead to deliver a better life to all our people. We are unwaveringly committed to reform and opening up, and we will concentrate on the major task of shifting the growth model, focus on running our own affairs well and make continued efforts to boost the socialist modernization drive.
“亲望亲好，邻望邻好。”中国将坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，巩固睦邻友好，深化互利合作，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家。
As a Chinese saying goes, neighbors wish each other well, just as loved ones do to each other. China will continue to promote friendship and partnership with its neighbors, consolidate friendly ties and deepen mutually beneficial cooperation with them and ensure that its development will bring even greater benefits to its neighbors.
我们将大力促进亚洲和世界发展繁荣。新世纪以来，中国同周边国家贸易额由1000多亿美元增至1.3万亿美元，已成为众多周边国家的最大贸易伙伴、最大出口市场、重要投资来源地。中国同亚洲和世界的利益融合达到前所未有的广度和深度。当前和今后一个时期，中国经济将继续保持健康发展势头，国内需求特别是消费需求将持续扩大，对外投资也将大幅增加。据测算，今后5年，中国将进口10万亿美元左右的商品，对外投资规模将达到5000亿美元，出境旅游有可能超过4亿人次。中国越发展，越能给亚洲和世界带来发展机遇。
China will vigorously promote development and prosperity in both Asia and the world. Since the beginning of the new century, China's trade with its neighbors has grown from $100 billion and more to $1.3 trillion. China has become the largest trading partner, the biggest export market and a major source of investment of many of these countries. China's interests have never been so closely connected with those of the rest of Asia and the world in both scope and depth. Going forward, China will maintain robust growth momentum. Its domestic demand, particularly consumption-driven demand, will continue to grow, and its outbound investment will increase substantially. It is projected that in the coming five years, China's import will reach some $10 trillion, its outbound investment will reach $500 billion and the number of its outbound tourists may well exceed 400 million. The more China grows itself, the more development opportunities it will create for the rest of Asia and the world.
我们将坚定维护亚洲和世界和平稳定。中国人民对战争和动荡带来的苦难有着刻骨铭心的记忆，对和平有着孜孜不倦的追求。中国将通过争取和平国际环境发展自己，又以自身发展维护和促进世界和平。中国将继续妥善处理同有关国家的分歧和摩擦，在坚定捍卫国家主权、安全、领土完整的基础上，努力维护同周边国家关系和地区和平稳定大局。中国将在国际和地区热点问题上继续发挥建设性作用，坚持劝和促谈，为通过对话谈判妥善处理有关问题作出不懈努力。
We are firm in our resolve to uphold peace and stability in Asia and the world. Knowing too well the agonizing sufferings inflicted by war and turbulence, the Chinese people deeply cherish peace. China will continue to develop itself by securing a peaceful international environment and, at the same time, uphold and promote world peace through its own development. China will continue to properly handle differences and frictions with relevant countries. On the basis of firmly upholding its sovereignty, security and territorial integrity, China will maintain good relations with its neighbors and overall peace and stability in our region. China will continue to play a constructive role in addressing regional and global hotspot issues, encourage dialogue and talks for peace, and work tirelessly to solve the relevant issues properly through dialogue and negotiations.
我们将积极推动亚洲和世界范围的地区合作。中国将加快同周边地区的互联互通建设，积极探讨搭建地区性融资平台，促进区域内经济融合，提高地区竞争力。中国将积极参与亚洲区域合作进程，坚持推进同亚洲之外其他地区和国家的区域次区域合作。中国将继续倡导并推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，加强同各国的双向投资，打造合作新亮点。中国将坚定支持亚洲地区对其他地区的开放合作，更好促进本地区和世界其他地区共同发展。中国致力于缩小南北差距，支持发展中国家增强自主发展能力。
We will energetically promote regional cooperation in Asia and around the world. China will increase connectivity with its neighbors, actively explore the building of a regional financing platform, advance economic integration within the region and thus increase its competitiveness. China will take an active part in Asia's regional cooperation process and promote regional and sub-regional cooperation with non-Asian regions and countries. China will continue to champion and promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, step up bilateral investment with other countries and boost cooperation in new priority areas. China firmly supports Asia's opening up to and cooperation with other regions so as to promote their common development. China is committed to narrowing the North-South gap and supports other developing countries in their efforts to enhance capacity for self development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！亲仁善邻，是中国自古以来的传统。亚洲和世界和平发展、合作共赢的事业没有终点，只有一个接一个的新起点。中国愿同五大洲的朋友们携手努力，共同创造亚洲和世界的美好未来，造福亚洲和世界人民！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
Promoting good neighborliness is a time-honored tradition of China. To enhance peaceful development and win-win cooperation in Asia and the world is a race that has one starting point after another and knows no finishing line. We in China are ready to join hands with friends from across the world in a concerted effort to create a bright future for both Asia and the world and bring benefit to the Asian people and the people around the world.
最后，预祝年会取得圆满成功！谢谢大家！
In conclusion, I wish the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2013 every success!
