32. 习近平在第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的主旨演讲
齐心开创共建“一带一路”美好未来
Working Together to Deliver a Brighter Future for Belt and Road Cooperation
——在第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2019年4月26日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation
Beijing, 26 April 2019 
尊敬的各位国家元首，政府首脑，
各位高级代表，
各位国际组织负责人，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellencies High-level Representatives,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends, 
上午好！“春秋多佳日，登高赋新诗。”在这个春意盎然的美好时节，我很高兴同各位嘉宾一道，共同出席第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位来宾表示热烈的欢迎！
Good morning! As a line of a classical Chinese poem goes, "Spring and autumn are lovely seasons in which friends get together to climb up mountains and write poems." On this beautiful spring day, it gives me great pleasure to have you with us here at the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation (BRF). On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I extend a very warm welcome to you all! 
两年前，我们在这里举行首届高峰论坛，规划政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通的合作蓝图。今天，来自世界各地的朋友再次聚首。我期待着同大家一起，登高望远，携手前行，共同开创共建“一带一路”的美好未来。
Two years ago, it was here that we met for the First Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, where we drew a blueprint of cooperation to enhance policy, infrastructure, trade, financial and people-to-people connectivity. Today, we are once again meeting here with you, friends from across the world. I look forward to scaling new heights with you and enhancing our partnership. Together, we will create an even brighter future for Belt and Road cooperation. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
共建“一带一路”倡议，目的是聚焦互联互通，深化务实合作，携手应对人类面临的各种风险挑战，实现互利共赢、共同发展。在各方共同努力下，“六廊六路多国多港”的互联互通架构基本形成，一大批合作项目落地生根，首届高峰论坛的各项成果顺利落实，150多个国家和国际组织同中国签署共建“一带一路”合作协议。共建“一带一路”倡议同联合国、东盟、非盟、欧盟、欧亚经济联盟等国际和地区组织的发展和合作规划对接，同各国发展战略对接。从亚欧大陆到非洲、美洲、大洋洲，共建“一带一路”为世界经济增长开辟了新空间，为国际贸易和投资搭建了新平台，为完善全球经济治理拓展了新实践，为增进各国民生福祉作出了新贡献，成为共同的机遇之路、繁荣之路。事实证明，共建“一带一路”不仅为世界各国发展提供了新机遇，也为中国开放发展开辟了新天地。
The joint pursuit of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) aims to enhance connectivity and practical cooperation. It is about jointly meeting various challenges and risks confronting mankind and delivering win-win outcomes and common development. Thanks to the joint efforts of all of us involved in this initiative, a general connectivity framework consisting of six corridors, six connectivity routes and multiple countries and ports has been put in place. A large number of cooperation projects have been launched, and the decisions of the first BRF have been smoothly implemented. More than 150 countries and international organizations have signed agreements on Belt and Road cooperation with China. The complementarity between the BRI and the development plans or cooperation initiatives of international and regional organizations such as the United Nations, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the African Union, the European Union, the Eurasian Economic Union and between the BRI and the development strategies of the participating countries has been enhanced. From the Eurasian continent to Africa, the Americas and Oceania, Belt and Road cooperation has opened up new space for global economic growth, produced new platforms for international trade and investment and offered new ways for improving global economic governance. Indeed, this initiative has helped improve people's lives in countries involved and created more opportunities for common prosperity. What we have achieved amply demonstrates that Belt and Road cooperation has both generated new opportunities for the development of all participating countries and opened up new horizon for China's development and opening-up. 
中国古人说：“万物得其本者生，百事得其道者成。”共建“一带一路”，顺应经济全球化的历史潮流，顺应全球治理体系变革的时代要求，顺应各国人民过上更好日子的强烈愿望。面向未来，我们要聚焦重点、深耕细作，共同绘制精谨细腻的“工笔画”，推动共建“一带一路”沿着高质量发展方向不断前进。
An ancient Chinese philosopher observed that "plants with strong roots grow well, and efforts with the right focus will ensure success." The Belt and Road cooperation embraces the historical trend of economic globalization, responds to the call for improving the global governance system and meets people's longing for a better life. Going ahead, we should focus on priorities and project execution, move forward with results-oriented implementation, just like an architect refining the blueprint, and jointly promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation. 
——我们要秉持共商共建共享原则，倡导多边主义，大家的事大家商量着办，推动各方各施所长、各尽所能，通过双边合作、三方合作、多边合作等各种形式，把大家的优势和潜能充分发挥出来，聚沙成塔、积水成渊。
—We need to be guided by the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. We need to act in the spirit of multilateralism, pursue cooperation through consultation and keep all participants motivated. We may, by engaging in bilateral, trilateral and multilateral cooperation, fully tap into the strengths of all participants. Just as a Chinese proverb says, "A tower is built when soil on earth accumulates, and a river is formed when streams come together." 
——我们要坚持开放、绿色、廉洁理念，不搞封闭排他的小圈子，把绿色作为底色，推动绿色基础设施建设、绿色投资、绿色金融，保护好我们赖以生存的共同家园，坚持一切合作都在阳光下运作，共同以零容忍态度打击腐败。我们发起了《廉洁丝绸之路北京倡议》，愿同各方共建风清气正的丝绸之路。
—We need to pursue open, green and clean cooperation. The Belt and Road is not an exclusive club; it aims to promote green development. We may launch green infrastructure projects, make green investment and provide green financing to protect the Earth which we all call home. In pursuing Belt and Road cooperation, everything should be done in a transparent way, and we should have zero tolerance for corruption. The Beijing Initiative for Clean Silk Road has been launched, which represents our strong commitment to transparency and clean governance in pursuing Belt and Road cooperation. 
——我们要努力实现高标准、惠民生、可持续目标，引入各方普遍支持的规则标准，推动企业在项目建设、运营、采购、招投标等环节按照普遍接受的国际规则标准进行，同时要尊重各国法律法规。要坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，聚焦消除贫困、增加就业、改善民生，让共建“一带一路”成果更好惠及全体人民，为当地经济社会发展作出实实在在的贡献，同时确保商业和财政上的可持续性，做到善始善终、善作善成。
—We need to pursue high standard cooperation to improve people's lives and promote sustainable development. We will adopt widely accepted rules and standards and encourage participating companies to follow general international rules and standards in project development, operation, procurement and tendering and bidding. The laws and regulations of participating countries should also be respected. We need to take a people-centered approach, give priority to poverty alleviation and job creation to see that the joint pursuit of Belt and Road cooperation will deliver true benefits to the people of participating countries and contribute to their social and economic development. We also need to ensure the commercial and fiscal sustainability of all projects so that they will achieve the intended goals as planned. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 共建“一带一路”，关键是互联互通。我们应该构建全球互联互通伙伴关系，实现共同发展繁荣。我相信，只要大家齐心协力、守望相助，即使相隔万水千山，也一定能够走出一条互利共赢的康庄大道。
Connectivity is vital to advancing Belt and Road cooperation. We need to promote a global partnership of connectivity to achieve common development and prosperity. I am confident that as we work closely together, we will transcend geographical distance and embark on a path of win-win cooperation. 
基础设施是互联互通的基石，也是许多国家发展面临的瓶颈。建设高质量、可持续、抗风险、价格合理、包容可及的基础设施，有利于各国充分发挥资源禀赋，更好融入全球供应链、产业链、价值链，实现联动发展。中国将同各方继续努力，构建以新亚欧大陆桥等经济走廊为引领，以中欧班列、陆海新通道等大通道和信息高速路为骨架，以铁路、港口、管网等为依托的互联互通网络。我们将继续发挥共建“一带一路”专项贷款、丝路基金、各类专项投资基金的作用，发展丝路主题债券，支持多边开发融资合作中心有效运作。我们欢迎多边和各国金融机构参与共建“一带一路”投融资，鼓励开展第三方市场合作，通过多方参与实现共同受益的目标。
Infrastructure is the bedrock of connectivity, while the lack of infrastructure has held up the development of many countries. High-quality, sustainable, resilient, affordable, inclusive and accessible infrastructure projects can help countries fully leverage their resource endowment, better integrate into the global supply, industrial and value chains, and realize inter-connected development. To this end, China will continue to work with other parties to build a connectivity network centering on economic corridors such as the New Eurasian Land Bridge, supplemented by major transportation routes like the China-Europe Railway Express and the New International Land-Sea Trade Corridor and information expressway, and reinforced by major railway, port and pipeline projects. We will continue to make good use of the Belt and Road Special Lending Scheme, the Silk Road Fund, and various special investment funds, develop Silk Road theme bonds, and support the Multilateral Cooperation Center for Development Finance in its operation. We welcome the participation of multilateral and national financial institutions in BRI investment and financing and encourage third-market cooperation. With the involvement of multiple stakeholders, we can surely deliver benefits to all. 
商品、资金、技术、人员流通，可以为经济增长提供强劲动力和广阔空间。“河海不择细流，故能就其深。”如果人为阻断江河的流入，再大的海，迟早都有干涸的一天。我们要促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。我们将同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，加强海关、税收、审计监管等领域合作，建立共建“一带一路”税收征管合作机制，加快推广“经认证的经营者”国际互认合作。我们还制定了《“一带一路”融资指导原则》，发布了《“一带一路”债务可持续性分析框架》，为共建“一带一路”融资合作提供指南。中方今年将举办第二届中国国际进口博览会，为各方进入中国市场搭建更广阔平台。
The flow of goods, capital, technology and people will power economic growth and create broad space for it. As a Chinese saying goes, "The ceaseless inflow of rivers makes the ocean deep." However, were such inflow to be cut, the ocean, however big, would eventually dry up. We need to promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, say no to protectionism, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. To this end, we will enter into negotiation with more countries to conclude high-standard free trade agreements, and strengthen cooperation in customs, taxation and audit oversight by setting up the Belt and Road Initiative Tax Administration Cooperation Mechanism and accelerating international collaboration on the mutual recognition of Authorized Economic Operators. We have also formulated the Guiding Principles on Financing the Development of the Belt and Road and published the Debt Sustainability Framework for Participating Countries of the Belt and Road Initiative to provide guidance for BRI financing cooperation. In addition, the Second China International Import Expo will be held this year to build an even bigger platform for other parties to access the Chinese market. 
创新就是生产力，企业赖之以强，国家赖之以盛。我们要顺应第四次工业革命发展趋势，共同把握数字化、网络化、智能化发展机遇，共同探索新技术、新业态、新模式，探寻新的增长动能和发展路径，建设数字丝绸之路、创新丝绸之路。中国将继续实施共建“一带一路”科技创新行动计划，同各方一道推进科技人文交流、共建联合实验室、科技园区合作、技术转移四大举措。我们将积极实施创新人才交流项目，未来5年支持5000人次中外方创新人才开展交流、培训、合作研究。我们还将支持各国企业合作推进信息通信基础设施建设，提升网络互联互通水平。
Innovation boosts productivity; it makes companies competitive and countries strong. We need to keep up with the trend of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, jointly seize opportunities created by digital, networked and smart development, explore new technologies and new forms and models of business, foster new growth drivers and explore new development pathways, and build the digital Silk Road and the Silk Road of innovation. China will continue to carry out the Belt and Road Science, Technology and Innovation Cooperation Action Plan, and will work with our partners to pursue four major initiatives, namely the Science and Technology People-to-People Exchange Initiative, the Joint Laboratory Initiative, the Science Park Cooperation Initiative, and the Technology Transfer Initiative. We will actively implement the Belt and Road Initiative Talents Exchange Program, and will, in the coming five years, offer 5,000 opportunities for exchange, training and cooperative research for talents from China and other BRI participating countries. We will also support companies of various countries in jointly advancing ICT infrastructure building to upgrade cyber connectivity. 
发展不平衡是当今世界最大的不平衡。在共建“一带一路”过程中，要始终从发展的视角看问题，将可持续发展理念融入项目选择、实施、管理的方方面面。我们要致力于加强国际发展合作，为发展中国家营造更多发展机遇和空间，帮助他们摆脱贫困，实现可持续发展。为此，我们同各方共建“一带一路”可持续城市联盟、绿色发展国际联盟，制定《“一带一路”绿色投资原则》，发起“关爱儿童、共享发展，促进可持续发展目标实现”合作倡议。我们启动共建“一带一路”生态环保大数据服务平台，将继续实施绿色丝路使者计划，并同有关国家一道，实施“一带一路”应对气候变化南南合作计划。我们还将深化农业、卫生、减灾、水资源等领域合作，同联合国在发展领域加强合作，努力缩小发展差距。
Imbalance in development is the greatest imbalance confronting today's world. In the joint pursuit of the BRI, we must always take a development-oriented approach and see that the vision of sustainable development underpins project selection, implementation and management. We need to strengthen international development cooperation so as to create more opportunities for developing countries, help them eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development. In this connection, China and its partners have set up the Belt and Road Sustainable Cities Alliance and the BRI International Green Development Coalition, formulated the Green Investment Principles for the Belt and Road Development, and launched the Declaration on Accelerating the Sustainable Development Goals for Children through Shared Development. We have set up the BRI Environmental Big Data Platform. We will continue to implement the Green Silk Road Envoys Program and work with relevant countries to jointly implement the Belt and Road South-South Cooperation Initiative on Climate Change. We will also deepen cooperation in agriculture, health, disaster mitigation and water resources; and we will enhance development cooperation with the United Nations to narrow the gap in development. 
我们要积极架设不同文明互学互鉴的桥梁，深入开展教育、科学、文化、体育、旅游、卫生、考古等各领域人文合作，加强议会、政党、民间组织往来，密切妇女、青年、残疾人等群体交流，形成多元互动的人文交流格局。未来5年，中国将邀请共建“一带一路”国家的政党、智库、民间组织等1万名代表来华交流。我们将鼓励和支持沿线国家社会组织广泛开展民生合作，联合开展一系列环保、反腐败等领域培训项目，深化各领域人力资源开发合作。我们将持续实施“丝绸之路”中国政府奖学金项目，举办“一带一路”青年创意与遗产论坛、青年学生“汉语桥”夏令营等活动。我们还将设立共建“一带一路”国际智库合作委员会、新闻合作联盟等机制，汇聚各方智慧和力量。
We need to build bridges for exchanges and mutual learning among different cultures, deepen cooperation in education, science, culture, sports, tourism, health and archaeology, strengthen exchanges between parliaments, political parties and non-governmental organizations and exchanges between women, young people and people with disabilities in order to facilitate multi-faceted people-to-people exchanges. To this end, we will, in the coming five years, invite 10,000 representatives of political parties, think tanks and non-governmental organizations from Belt and Road participating countries to visit China. We will encourage and support extensive cooperation on livelihood projects among social organizations of participating countries, conduct a number of environmental protection and anti-corruption training courses and deepen human resources development cooperation in various areas. We will continue to run the Chinese government scholarship Silk Road Program, host the International Youth Forum on Creativity and Heritage along the Silk Roads and the "Chinese Bridge" summer camps. We will also put in place new mechanisms such as the Belt and Road Studies Network and the Belt and Road News Alliance to draw inspiration and pool our strength for greater synergy. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。70年前，中国人民历经几代人上下求索，终于在中国共产党领导下建立了新中国，中国人民从此站了起来，中国人民的命运从此掌握在了自己手中。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. Seven decades ago, through the arduous struggle carried out by several generations of Chinese people and under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, New China was founded. We Chinese have since stood up and held our future in our own hands. 
历经70年艰苦奋斗，中国人民立足本国国情，在实践中不断探索前进方向，开辟了中国特色社会主义道路。今天的中国，已经站在新的历史起点上。我们深知，尽管成就辉煌，但前方还有一座座山峰需要翻越，还有一个个险滩等待跋涉。我们将继续沿着中国特色社会主义道路大步向前，坚持全面深化改革，坚持高质量发展，坚持扩大对外开放，坚持走和平发展道路，推动构建人类命运共同体。
Over the past seven decades, we in China have, based on its realities, constantly explored the way forward through practices, and have succeeded in following the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. Today, China has reached a new historical starting point. However, we are keenly aware that with all we have achieved, there are still many mountains to scale and many shoals to navigate. We will continue to advance along the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics, deepen sweeping reforms, pursue quality development, and expand opening-up. We remain committed to peaceful development and will endeavor to build a community with a shared future for mankind. 
下一步，中国将采取一系列重大改革开放举措，加强制度性、结构性安排，促进更高水平对外开放。
Going forward, China will take a series of major reform and opening-up measures and make stronger institutional and structural moves to boost higher quality opening-up. 
第一，更广领域扩大外资市场准入。公平竞争能够提高效率、带来繁荣。中国已实施准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理模式，未来将继续大幅缩减负面清单，推动现代服务业、制造业、农业全方位对外开放，并在更多领域允许外资控股或独资经营。我们将新布局一批自由贸易试验区，加快探索建设自由贸易港。我们将加快制定配套法规，确保严格实施《外商投资法》。我们将以公平竞争、开放合作推动国内供给侧结构性改革，有效淘汰落后和过剩产能，提高供给体系质量和效率。
First, we will expand market access for foreign investment in more areas. Fair competition boosts business performance and creates prosperity. China has already adopted a management model based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list, and will continue to significantly shorten the negative list. We will work for the all-round opening-up of modern services, manufacturing and agriculture, and will allow the operation of foreign-controlled or wholly foreign-owned businesses in more sectors. We will plan new pilot free trade zones and explore at a faster pace the opening of a free trade port. We will accelerate the adoption of supporting regulations to ensure full implementation of the Foreign Investment Law. We will promote supply-side structural reform through fair competition and open cooperation, and will phase out backward and excessive production capacity in an effective way to improve the quality and efficiency of supply. 
第二，更大力度加强知识产权保护国际合作。没有创新就没有进步。加强知识产权保护，不仅是维护内外资企业合法权益的需要，更是推进创新型国家建设、推动高质量发展的内在要求。中国将着力营造尊重知识价值的营商环境，全面完善知识产权保护法律体系，大力强化执法，加强对外国知识产权人合法权益的保护，杜绝强制技术转让，完善商业秘密保护，依法严厉打击知识产权侵权行为。中国愿同世界各国加强知识产权保护合作，创造良好创新生态环境，推动同各国在市场化法治化原则基础上开展技术交流合作。
Second, we will intensify efforts to enhance international cooperation in intellectual property protection. Without innovation, there will be no progress. Full intellectual property protection will not only ensure the lawful rights and interests of Chinese and foreign companies; it is also crucial to promoting China's innovation-driven and quality development. China will spare no effort to foster a business environment that respects the value of knowledge. We will fully improve the legal framework for protecting intellectual property, step up law enforcement, enhance protection of the lawful rights and interests of foreign intellectual property owners, stop forced technology transfer, improve protection of trade secrets, and crack down hard on violations of intellectual property in accordance with law. China will strengthen cooperation with other countries in intellectual property protection, create an enabling environment for innovation and promote technological exchanges and cooperation with other countries on the basis of market principles and the rule of law. 
第三，更大规模增加商品和服务进口。中国既是“世界工厂”，也是“世界市场”。中国有世界上规模最大、成长最快的中等收入群体，消费增长潜力巨大。为满足人民日益增长的物质文化生活需要，增加消费者选择和福利，我们将进一步降低关税水平，消除各种非关税壁垒，不断开大中国市场大门，欢迎来自世界各国的高质量产品。我们不刻意追求贸易顺差，愿意进口更多国外有竞争力的优质农产品、制成品和服务，促进贸易平衡发展。
Third, we will increase the import of goods and services on an even larger scale. China is both a global factory and a global market. With the world's largest and fastest growing middle-income population, China has a vast potential for increasing consumption. To meet our people's ever-growing material and cultural needs and give our consumers more choices and benefits, we will further lower tariffs and remove various non-tariff barriers. We will steadily open China's market wider to quality products from across the world. China does not seek trade surplus; we want to import more competitive quality agricultural products, manufactured goods and services to promote balanced trade. 
第四，更加有效实施国际宏观经济政策协调。全球化的经济需要全球化的治理。中国将加强同世界各主要经济体的宏观政策协调，努力创造正面外溢效应，共同促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。中国不搞以邻为壑的汇率贬值，将不断完善人民币汇率形成机制，使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，保持人民币汇率在合理均衡水平上的基本稳定，促进世界经济稳定。规则和信用是国际治理体系有效运转的基石，也是国际经贸关系发展的前提。中国积极支持和参与世贸组织改革，共同构建更高水平的国际经贸规则。
Fourth, we will more effectively engage in international macro-economic policy coordination. A globalized economy calls for global governance. China will strengthen macro policy coordination with other major economies to generate a positive spillover and jointly contribute to robust, sustainable, balanced and inclusive global growth. China will not resort to the beggar-thy-neighbor practice of RMB devaluation. On the contrary, we will continue to improve the exchange rate regime, see that the market plays a decisive role in resource allocation and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. These steps will help ensure the steady growth of the global economy. Rules and credibility underpin the effective functioning of the international governance system; they are the prerequisite for growing international economic and trade relations. China is an active supporter and participant of WTO reform and will work with others to develop international economic and trade rules of higher standards. 
第五，更加重视对外开放政策贯彻落实。中国人历来讲求“一诺千金”。我们高度重视履行同各国达成的多边和双边经贸协议，加强法治政府、诚信政府建设，建立有约束的国际协议履约执行机制，按照扩大开放的需要修改完善法律法规，在行政许可、市场监管等方面规范各级政府行为，清理废除妨碍公平竞争、扭曲市场的不合理规定、补贴和做法，公平对待所有企业和经营者，完善市场化、法治化、便利化的营商环境。
Fifth, we will work harder to ensure the implementation of opening-up related policies. We Chinese have a saying that honoring a promise carries the weight of gold. We are committed to implementing multilateral and bilateral economic and trade agreements reached with other countries. We will strengthen the building of a government based on the rule of law and good faith. A binding mechanism for honoring international agreements will be put in place. Laws and regulations will be revised and improved in keeping with the need to expand opening-up. We will see that governments at all levels operate in a well-regulated way when it comes to issuing administrative licenses and conducting market oversight. We will overhaul and abolish unjustified regulations, subsidies and practices that impede fair competition and distort the market. We will treat all enterprises and business entities equally, and foster an enabling business environment based on market operation and governed by law. 
中国扩大开放的举措，是根据中国改革发展客观需要作出的自主选择，这有利于推动经济高质量发展，有利于满足人民对美好生活的向往，有利于世界和平、稳定、发展。我们也希望世界各国创造良好投资环境，平等对待中国企业、留学生和学者，为他们正常开展国际交流合作活动提供公平友善的环境。我们坚信，一个更加开放的中国，将同世界形成更加良性的互动，带来更加进步和繁荣的中国和世界。
These measures to expand opening-up are a choice China has made by itself to advance its reform and development. It will promote high-quality economic development, meet the people's desire for a better life, and contribute to world peace, stability and development. We hope that other countries will also create an enabling environment of investment, treat Chinese enterprises, students and scholars as equals, and provide a fair and friendly environment for them to engage in international exchanges and cooperation. We are convinced that a more open China will further integrate itself into the world and deliver greater progress and prosperity for both China and the world at large. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
让我们携起手来，一起播撒合作的种子，共同收获发展的果实，让各国人民更加幸福，让世界更加美好！
Let us join hands to sow the seeds of cooperation, harvest the fruits of development, bring greater happiness to our people and make our world a better place for all! 祝本次高峰论坛圆满成功！
In conclusion, I wish the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation a full success! 谢谢大家。
Thank you!