42. 习近平在文莱媒体发表署名文章
携手谱写中国同文莱关系新华章
Jointly Write a New Chapter of China-Brunei Relations
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
应哈桑纳尔苏丹陛下邀请，我将于11月18日至20日对文莱进行国事访问。这是我首次访问贵国，我对此行感到十分高兴。
At the invitation of His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah, I will pay a state visit to Brunei Darussalam from 18 to 20 November. This will be my first visit to Brunei, a visit I am looking forward to with great pleasure.
文莱国名寓意“和平之邦”。这里有旖旎的自然风光、浓郁的城市风情、祥和的社会氛围，仿佛中国古代诗人陶渊明笔下的世外桃源。近年来，在苏丹陛下卓越领导下，文莱走出一条符合本国国情的发展道路，国家繁荣富足，人民安居乐业。我衷心祝愿文莱取得更大发展成就。
Brunei Darussalam, the "abode of peace", is known for its charming natural scenery, fascinating urban culture and social harmony. All this reminds me of the fictional land of peace, harmony and idyllic beauty described by the ancient Chinese poet Tao Yuanming. In recent years, Brunei has, under the outstanding leadership of His Majesty the Sultan, embarked on a development path that suits its national conditions and delivered prosperity and happy livelihood to its people. I sincerely wish Brunei even greater success on the road ahead.
中文两国是隔海相望的友好邻邦。文莱自古便是海上丝绸之路的重要组成部分。早在中国西汉时期，我们的祖先就通过这条海上纽带互通有无，谱写了相知相交相亲的美好篇章。郑和率领船队两次途经文莱，给当地人民带来了和平与友谊，被文莱民间亲切称作“郑和元帅”。斯里巴加湾市的“王总兵路”和蒲公墓，中国南京市的浡泥国王墓，都见证了两国悠久的友好交往历史。
For China, Brunei is a friendly neighbor across the sea as well as an important link along the ancient maritime Silk Road. It is thanks to this maritime Silk Road that our ancestors started exchanges over 2,000 years ago (in China's Western Han Dynasty), and our peoples have got to know each other and developed a close bond of friendship. Many beautiful stories of our exchanges are still being told today. The fleet of the Chinese navigator Zheng He, who was fondly known as Panglima Cheng Ho among the people of Brunei, stopped over twice in Brunei about 600 years ago, bringing a message of peace and friendship to the local people. The Jalan Ong Sum Ping and Pu Kung Chih Mu in Bandar Seri Begawan and the Tomb of the King of Boni in China's Nanjing city all bear witness to the long history of friendly interactions between the two countries.
1991年，中国同文莱正式建立外交关系，两国绵延千年的“前缘”得以重续。双方建立战略合作关系5年来，政治互信不断深化，务实合作稳步推进，在国际和地区事务中相互支持和配合。中文关系步入历史最好时期，成为大小国家平等相待、互利共赢、共同发展的典范。
In 1991, with the establishment of diplomatic relations, China and Brunei renewed the millennium-old friendship. Since the two countries developed a strategic cooperative relationship five years ago, we have deepened political mutual trust, steadily advanced practical cooperation, and supported and collaborated with each other on regional and international issues. China-Brunei relationship has been as good as ever, setting a good example of relations between countries of different sizes based on equality and mutual benefit for common development.
我提出的共建“一带一路”倡议得到文莱方面积极响应和大力支持，双方签署谅解备忘录，推动这一倡议同文莱“2035宏愿”对接，为两国关系发展注入了新动力。
Brunei has warmly responded to and strongly supported the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) I proposed. Our two sides have signed a Memorandum of Understanding to build synergy between the BRI and Brunei's Wawasan 2035, lending fresh impetus to our bilateral relations.
今年来，两国经贸合作快速拓展。中国已成为文莱最重要的合作伙伴之一。恒逸文莱石化、“广西－文莱经济走廊”两大旗舰合作项目顺利推进。来文莱投资兴业的中国企业日益增多，为文莱经济多元化发展发挥了积极作用。中国企业积极参与文莱基础设施建设，承建了大摩拉岛大桥、特里塞－鲁木高速公路、乌鲁都东水坝等工程，提升了文莱互联互通水平，也成为文莱当地靓丽的“中国名片”。
Since the beginning of this year, economic cooperation and trade between the two countries have expanded rapidly with China becoming one of Brunei's most important partners. Two flagship projects, the Hengyi Brunei PMB Petrochemical Project and the Guangxi-Brunei Economic Corridor, are making good progress. More and more Chinese companies are making investments and doing business in Brunei, contributing to the diversification of Brunei's economy. Chinese companies are actively involved in infrastructure development in Brunei, including the Pulau Muara Besar Bridge, the Telisai-Lumut Highway and the Ulu Tutong Dam. These projects have improved local connectivity and become shining "brand names" of China in Brunei.
两国人文交流日益频繁。中国是文莱第一大游客来源国，斯里巴加湾市街头不时可以看到中国游客的身影。两国开通斯里巴加湾市至香港、上海、杭州、南宁、昆明的直航航线，为人员往来架起了空中走廊。南京市和斯里巴加湾市作为友城频繁走动，中文两国人民情谊焕发出新的蓬勃生机。
Cultural and people-to-people exchanges are flourishing. China is Brunei's biggest source of tourists and Chinese visitors are now a common sight on the streets of Bandar Seri Begawan. Direct flights operate like bridges over the air, connecting your capital with Chinese cities such as Hong Kong, Shanghai, Hangzhou, Nanning and Kunming and facilitating travelers between the two countries. The sister cities of Nanjing and Bandar Seri Begawan have enjoyed frequent exchanges between them. The friendship between the two peoples has thrived with new dynamism.
今年是中国改革开放40周年，也是共建“一带一路”倡议提出5周年。中方将坚持对外开放，推动“一带一路”走深走实，更好造福沿线国家人民。当前，中国和文莱分别处于实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标和实现“2035宏愿”的关键时期，双方应该加深了解，增进友谊，深化合作，推动中文关系更好向前发展。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up and the fifth anniversary of the BRI. Remaining firmly committed to the policy of opening-up, China will promote substantive, results-oriented cooperation under the BRI and deliver greater benefits to the people in BRI partner countries. As China is working for the "two centenary goals" of national development and Brunei is pursuing Wawasan 2035, our countries are both at crucial stages of development. It is important that we enhance mutual understanding, deepen friendship and strengthen cooperation to develop an even stronger relationship.
——我们要提升政治互信。双方要从战略高度和长远角度对中文关系发展作出规划，保持高层交往，增进政治互信，推动双边关系迈上新台阶。中方尊重并坚定支持文莱走符合本国国情的发展道路。
-- We need to enhance political mutual trust. To take our relations to new heights, our two sides need to plan the development of China-Brunei relations from a long-term, strategic perspective, maintain high-level interactions and enhance political mutual trust. China respects and supports Brunei in following a development path suited to its own national circumstances.
——我们要深耕务实合作。双方要加强战略对接，中方愿继续为文莱实现经济多元化提供助力，建设好重点合作项目，探讨能源、基建、农渔业、电子商务以及海上等领域合作。中方将鼓励中国企业赴文莱投资，欢迎文莱扩大优质产品对华出口。
-- We need to deepen practical cooperation. Our two sides need to build stronger synergy between our national development strategies. China will continue to assist Brunei in economic diversification, ensure the success of key cooperation projects and explore with Brunei possible cooperation in energy, infrastructure, agriculture, fishery, e-commerce, maritime and other fields. We will encourage Chinese companies to invest in Brunei, and welcome more quality exports from Brunei to China.
——我们要深化人文交流。双方要拓展文化、卫生、教育、体育、旅游、人力资源培训等领域交流合作。我们支持两国航空企业开通更多直航，鼓励更多中国游客赴文莱观光，欢迎更多文莱朋友到中国留学、旅游、工作。
-- We need to increase people-to-people and cultural exchanges. Our two sides need to expand cooperation and exchanges in culture, health, education, sports, tourism and human resources training. China supports the opening of more direct flights by our airliners and encourages more Chinese tourists to come here. In the same spirit, we also welcome more Bruneian friends to study, visit or work in China.
——我们要加强在国际和地区事务中的协作和配合。中方愿同文方一道，推动中国－东盟各领域合作深入发展，加快区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判进程，推动中国－东盟自由贸易区升级成果尽早落地，支持文方在东盟东部增长区中发挥更大作用。中方愿同文方携手维护多边主义、国际贸易体系、发展中国家正当权益，为地区和平、稳定、繁荣作出贡献。
-- We need to strengthen coordination and cooperation in regional and international affairs. China will work with Brunei to deepen China-ASEAN cooperation in various areas and accelerate negotiations for the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, so that we could deliver the benefits of the upgraded China-ASEAN FTA on the ground. China supports Brunei in playing a bigger role in BIMP-EAGA. China will work with Brunei in safeguarding multilateralism, the international trading system, and the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries, to make our contribution to peace, stability and prosperity in the region.
文莱有句谚语：“没有相互了解，就不能建立深厚情谊。”中国人讲：“人之相识，贵在相知。”我们愿同文莱做真诚相待的好朋友、共同发展的好伙伴。相信在两国政府和人民共同努力下，中文友好合作关系必将谱写出更加美好的篇章！
As a Bruneian proverb goes, tak kenal maka tak cinta (one may not like what he doesn't know). Similarly, the Chinese would often say, "For friends, what is precious is mutual understanding." China will remain Brunei's sincere and good friend and a trusted partner for common development. I am confident that, with the joint efforts of our two governments and people, we will write an even more beautiful chapter in our friendly relations and cooperation!