76 习近平在厄瓜多尔媒体发表署名文章《搭建中厄友好合作的新桥》
搭建中厄友好合作的新桥　
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
Build A New Bridge of China-Ecuador Friendship and Cooperation
By Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
应科雷亚总统邀请，我即将对厄瓜多尔进行国事访问。这是中厄建交以来中国国家主席首次访问厄瓜多尔。我带着中国人民的友好情谊和发展两国关系的良好愿望而来，期待搭建起连接中厄两国新的友好合作之桥。	
At the invitation of President Rafael Correa, I will pay a state visit to Ecuador, the first visit by a Chinese president to Ecuador since our two countries established diplomatic ties. I will bring with me the good will of the Chinese people and their best wishes for an ever-growing bilateral relationship, and I hope my visit will help build a new bridge of friendship and cooperation connecting our two countries.
厄瓜多尔是我这次拉美之行的首站。美丽的“赤道之国”令人神往。这里有巍峨耸立的安第斯山脉、广袤神秘的亚马孙雨林、富饶美丽的太平洋沿岸、“活的生物进化博物馆”加拉帕戈斯群岛。厄瓜多尔人民同自然和谐共处，追寻着美好生活，国家发展焕发出勃勃生机活力。	
Ecuador will be the first stop of my upcoming trip to Latin America. The alluring "Republic of the Equator" is famous for its majestic Andes Mountains, vast and enigmatic Amazon rainforest, mesmerizing Pacific coast rich in natural resources, and the living museum of evolution of life, the Galapagos Islands. Living in harmony with nature, the Ecuadorian people work hard in pursuit of a better life. And the country is making robust progress in its development.
“志合者，不以山海为远。”中国和厄瓜多尔虽然远隔重洋，但友谊的纽带将我们紧紧相连。今年4月，厄瓜多尔遭受强烈地震灾害。在突如其来的灾难面前，中国政府和人民感同身受，第一时间向厄瓜多尔政府和人民提供了力所能及的援助。在厄瓜多尔的中资企业和华侨华人同当地人民肩并肩、手牵手，共同抗震救灾，谱写了中厄友好新赞歌。	
As a Chinese saying goes, "Even mountains and seas cannot distance people with common aspirations." China and Ecuador share a close bond of friendship despite the long distance between us. In April, when Ecuador was hit by a strong earthquake, the deeply sympathetic Chinese government and people rushed to the aid of the Ecuadorian government and people. Chinese companies and Chinese communities in Ecuador stood shoulder to shoulder with the local people in the rescue and relief operations, writing a new chapter of China-Ecuador friendship.
我高兴地得知，在这次抗震救灾中，中国企业提供设备技术并负责建设的厄瓜多尔公共安全服务系统发挥了重要作用。作为指挥中枢，厄瓜多尔公共安全服务系统高效处理了大量信息，及时发出一道道指令，挽救了许多生命，降低了灾害带来的损失。作为厄瓜多尔的真诚朋友，我们将积极参与灾后重建，帮助灾区人民早日重建家园，早日恢复宁静美好的生活。	
I am glad to learn that ECU 911, the public security services system equipped and built by Chinese companies, played a vital role in the rescue and relief efforts. As the command and control center, ECU 911 effectively processed a massive amount of information and sent instructions without delay, thus saving numerous lives and preventing further damage. As Ecuador's sincere friend, China will take an active part in post-disaster reconstruction and help people in quake-hit areas rebuild their homes and get their life back to normal at an early date.
中国和厄瓜多尔都是发展中国家，有着相似的历史遭遇和共同的奋斗目标。建交36年来，我们相互理解、相互支持、相互帮助，积累了深厚的政治互信和友好情谊。中方坚定支持厄瓜多尔人民探索符合本国国情的发展道路，支持厄方为实现经济多元化发展所作的努力，支持厄方在国际和地区事务中发挥积极作用。	
Both China and Ecuador are developing countries with similar historical experience and shared development goals. Over the past 36 years since our two countries established diplomatic relations, we have forged deep political trust and friendship through mutual understanding, mutual support and mutual assistance. China firmly supports Ecuadorian people in exploring a development path suited to their national conditions. It also supports Ecuador in diversifying its economy and playing an active role in regional and international affairs.
中国始终从战略高度和长远角度看待和发展同厄瓜多尔关系。2015年1月，我同科雷亚总统一道宣布两国建立战略伙伴关系，两国政治互信和战略合作由此获得了新的强劲动力。当前，两国各领域互利合作硕果累累，呈现出全方位、宽领域、大规模特点。	
China views and grows its relations with Ecuador from a strategic and long-term perspective. In January 2015, President Rafael Correa and I announced the establishment of a strategic partnership between the two countries, giving a fresh and strong boost to our political trust and strategic cooperation. Since then, we have carried out fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation across the board featuring more dimensions, wider areas and larger scales.
两国贸易交流持续快速发展，中国成为厄瓜多尔第三大贸易伙伴。2015年，双边贸易额达到41亿美元，10年来翻了两番，而且仍然具有巨大潜力。厄瓜多尔香蕉、对虾质量上乘，已进入中国市场。我们希望看到更多厄瓜多尔特色产品和高附加值产品出口到中国，丰富中国市场。	
Trade ties continue to grow rapidly, with China becoming Ecuador's third largest trading partner. Two-way trade reached 4.1 billion U.S. dollars in 2015, quadrupling in just 10 years and promising huge, untapped potential. In addition to high-quality Ecuadorian bananas and prawns that have already entered the Chinese market, we look forward to having more local specialties and high value-added products from Ecuador to increase variety in the Chinese market.
两国投资和融资合作增长迅猛，厄瓜多尔是吸引中国投资和融资最多的拉美国家之一。中国在厄瓜多尔各类投资和融资超过百亿美元，支持了包括科卡科多－辛克雷水电站在内数百个项目，其中包括8个水电站、10余条公路等大型基础设施建设项目。这些项目建成后，厄瓜多尔发展将拥有强有力的火车头、发动机。我们感谢厄方对中国企业、中国设备、中国技术的信任。	
Investment and financing cooperation is growing exponentially. Ecuador is a top destination for Chinese investment and financing in Latin America. Chinese investment and financing in Ecuador has exceeded 10 billion U.S. dollars, supporting several hundred projects including major infrastructure projects such as the Coca Codo Sinclair hydropower plant, seven other hydropower plants and a dozen highways. Once up and running, these projects will equip Ecuador with a powerful locomotive and engine to propel its development further. We appreciate Ecuador's trust in Chinese companies, equipment and technologies.
两国人文交流精彩纷呈，双方在文化、教育、卫生、体育、司法等领域交往合作不断增多。双方在对方国家举办的文艺演出和文化展览，生动展示了本国文化精髓，引起当地民众的共鸣，越来越多中国人希望去厄瓜多尔旅游观光。	
People-to-people and cultural exchange has been vibrant, as evidenced by the growing interactions and cooperation in culture, education, health, sports and justice. We have presented cultural performances and exhibitions in each other's country. Such showcase of each other's cultural essence has been warmly welcomed by our people. As a result, more and more Chinese tourists aspire for opportunities to visit Ecuador.
高技术合作是我们两国合作的一大亮点。2013年，厄方的“飞马”卫星由中国火箭成功发射。中方对能够帮助厄方实现卫星梦感到由衷高兴。中国发展经验告诉我们，科学技术是第一生产力。中方理解厄方科技兴国的努力，以实际行动提供支持，先后派出8名科学家参与厄方“普罗米修斯”人才引进计划，在雅查伊智慧城开设联合实验室，并在厄瓜多尔举办两国科技合作混合委员会会议、中国－拉丁美洲和加勒比国家共同体科技创新论坛等。	
High-tech cooperation is another highlight of our bilateral cooperation. In 2013, Pegaso nanosatellite was successfully launched aboard a Chinese rocket. China is heartily glad about being able to help Ecuador realize its satellite dream. Having learned from its own development experience that science and technology is a primary source of productivity, China understands Ecuador's pursuit of prosperity through advance in science and technology. It has offered support with concrete actions, including by sending eight scientists to participate in the Prometheus program, opening a joint research lab in the Yachay City of Knowledge, and holding the meeting of China-Ecuador Mixed Commission of Scientific and Technological Cooperation and the China-CELAC Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation.
中厄友好还体现在双方富有成效的多边协作上。中方赞赏厄方坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，不畏强权，勇于维护正义。中方对中厄在联合国改革、气候变化、可持续发展等重大国际问题上的合作感到满意，赞赏厄方在担任拉丁美洲和加勒比国家共同体轮值主席国和“四驾马车”成员期间积极推动中拉论坛建设和中拉整体合作。	
Our friendship is also reflected in productive multilateral coordination. China commends Ecuador's commitment to an independent foreign policy of peace and to upholding justice in defiance of power politics. China appreciates its cooperation with Ecuador on major international issues such as UN reform, climate change and sustainable development, and applauds Ecuador's active efforts, in its capacity as CELAC rotating presidency and a member of Quartet, to promote the development of China-CELAC Forum and the overall cooperation between China and Latin American and Caribbean countries.
当前，中厄关系拥有稳固政治互信、深厚利益融合、广阔合作空间，两国战略伙伴关系具备全面发展的有利条件。我愿在这次访问期间，同科雷亚总统和厄瓜多尔各界朋友深入交流，推动中厄关系迈上新台阶。	
China-Ecuador relations enjoy solid political trust, converging interests and broad space for cooperation. With all these favorable conditions, our strategic partnership is poised to grow in an all-round way. I look forward to having in-depth exchanges with President Correa and friends from various sectors of Ecuador to take China-Ecuador relations to a new height.
——我们要做真诚互信的好伙伴。双方应该坚持从战略高度看待和推动两国关系发展，牢牢把握正确前进方向，确保中厄关系长期稳定健康发展。在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上，双方要相互理解和坚定支持，捍卫独立自主的发展权利。	
We shall be good partners treating each other with sincerity and trust. Our two sides need to look at and promote bilateral relations from a strategic height, keep to the right direction of development and ensure sustained, sound and steady growth of the relations. On issues concerning each other's core interests and major concerns, our two sides need to understand and firmly support each other and safeguard the right to independent development.
——我们要做共同发展的好伙伴。发展是硬道理。中国正在实施“十三五”发展规划，厄瓜多尔也在积极推进2013－2017年国家发展计划。我们要紧密结合各自发展战略，实现产业链紧密对接，推动务实合作向更高水平、更宽领域、更深层次发展。中方愿同厄方积极开展产能合作，加大向厄方技术转让，帮助厄方提高自主发展能力。	
We shall be good partners for common development. Development is what matters. China is implementing its 13th Five-Year Plan while Ecuador is advancing its National Development Plan (2013-2017). We need to seek complementarity between our respective development strategies and between our industrial chains, and deepen and upgrade practical cooperation in wider areas. China will carry out production capacity cooperation with Ecuador, increase technology transfer, and help Ecuador build greater capacity of independent development.
——我们要做世代友好的好伙伴。中厄两国都拥有优秀文明传统。我们要以两国人员往来便利化为契机，扩大文化、教育、卫生、体育、旅游、媒体、司法等领域交流合作，夯实民意基础。未来属于青年人。我们应该重视促进两国青年的交流往来，为中厄世代友好培养接班人。	
We shall be good partners enjoying ever-lasting friendship. Both China and Ecuador boast fine cultural heritage. We need to facilitate personnel flows in both directions and expand exchange in culture, education, health, sports, tourism, media and justice to cement popular support for bilateral ties. The future belongs to the young people. We need to prioritize youth exchanges and make sure that China-Ecuador friendship will be carried forward from generation to generation.
——我们要做南南合作的好伙伴。当前，世界形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，包括中国和厄瓜多尔在内的广大发展中国家要加强合作，共同应对挑战。中方祝贺厄瓜多尔将于2017年担任七十七国集团主席。双方应该保持密切沟通和配合，在重大国际和地区问题上协调统一立场，共同维护广大发展中国家利益。同时，我们也愿同厄瓜多尔等拉美国家一道，继续推进中拉论坛建设，不断扩大中拉整体合作。	
We shall be good partners for South-South cooperation. The world is undergoing profound and complex changes. Developing countries, China and Ecuador included, need to step up cooperation and jointly rise to challenges. China congratulates Ecuador on its forthcoming chairmanship of Group of 77 in 2017. Our two sides need to maintain close communication and collaboration, coordinate positions on major international and regional issues, and jointly safeguard the interests of developing countries. China will work with Ecuador and other Latin American and Caribbean countries to further develop China-CELAC Forum and expand China's cooperation with the region.
“兄弟同心，其利断金。”新形势下，中方愿同厄方携手努力，搭建起便于双方人民扩大友好交往的坚实桥梁，推动中厄关系向更高水平迈进。	
Another Chinese saying reads, "When brothers come together, there is nothing they cannot achieve." In the new circumstances, China will join hands with Ecuador to build a strong bridge for our two peoples to scale up friendly exchange and take our relations to a higher level.