75. 习近平在秘鲁媒体发表署名文章《共圆百年发展梦　同谱合作新华章》
共圆百年发展梦　同谱合作新华章
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Join Hands to Fulfill Centenary Dreams and Strive for New Progress in Cooperation
By H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
应库琴斯基总统邀请，我即将来秘鲁出席亚太经合组织第二十四次领导人非正式会议并对秘鲁进行国事访问。库琴斯基总统9月访华，我11月对秘鲁进行国事访问，中秘两国元首在2个月内实现互访，将传递出新形势下中秘携手合作、共谋发展的积极信号。	
I am looking forward to coming to Peru for the 24th APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting and my state visit to this country at the invitation of President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski. President Kuczynski visited China in September. By the time of my visit, the presidents of China and Peru will have exchanged visits in less than two months. This will send a strong signal of China and Peru working together for common development.
时隔8年，秘鲁再度担任亚太经合组织会议东道主，为深化亚太合作作出了新的重要贡献。中国全力支持秘鲁办会，共同推动会议取得积极成果。	
This would be the second time for Peru to play host to the leaders of APEC economies in eight years. It marks another new and important contribution Peru makes to Asia-Pacific cooperation. Peru will have China's full support and cooperation in facilitating positive outcomes of the meeting.
上世纪90年代，我访问过秘鲁，给我留下美好印象。秘鲁山水雄奇，资源禀赋得天独厚，“南美洲脊梁”安第斯山脉纵贯南北，亚马孙河浩浩荡荡，是矿产、能源、森林、生物资源的聚宝盆。秘鲁人民勤劳勇敢，历史文化底蕴深厚，印加文明悠久灿烂，马丘比丘遗址、纳斯卡地画等古文明瑰宝令人向往，《山鹰之歌》等安第斯民歌旋律悠扬，深受世界各国人民喜爱。	
I still recall my visit to Peru in the 1990s, which left me deeply impressed by the majestic landscape and rich natural endowments of this country. The Andes Mountains, "the backbone of South America," extends from North to South, and the mighty Amazon has nourished a treasure house of minerals, fossil fuel, forests and biological resources. Peru is also known for its hard-working and courageous people, who created a time-honored history and rich culture. Its dazzling cultural heritage such as the Inca civilization, Machu Picchu and Nazca Lines are favored destinations for international visitors. El Condor Pasa and other Andean folk melodies are popular all over the world.
中秘有着传统友好关系，两国交往源远流长。早在400多年前，中国人不畏惊涛骇浪，开辟出跨越太平洋的海上丝绸之路，自此两国往来络绎不绝。近1个多世纪以来，许多中国人远赴秘鲁，在这片热土上寻觅幸福生活。他们同秘鲁人民一起辛勤劳作，为秘鲁国家建设作出积极贡献，也成为最早在秘鲁传播中华文化的友好使者。如今，拥有中国血统的秘鲁人占全国总人口近十分之一，秘鲁人民亲切地把中国人称为“老乡”，说明两国传统友好已经深深扎根在两国人民心间，这是我们两国共有的宝贵财富。	
China and Peru enjoy a long and deep friendship. Back more than 400 years ago, braving storms and waves, the Chinese people opened a maritime Silk Road across the Pacific. The Chinese and the Peruvians have been visiting each other ever since. In the past 100 years, a large number of Chinese traveled to Peru to seek a life of happiness on this promising land. They worked diligently with the local people and actively contributed to Peru's development. They were the first generation of friendship envoys who brought Chinese culture to Peru. Today, nearly one tenth of the Peruvian population descended from Chinese ancestry. The Chinese are even called by an affectionate nickname in Peru the "paisano" (old pal), showing the deep roots of friendship between our peoples. This is a valuable asset shared by our two countries.
秘鲁是最早同新中国建交的拉美国家之一。建交45年来，双方坚持相互尊重、平等相待，坚定支持对方核心利益和重大关切，积累了深厚政治互信。这奠定了中秘关系发展的重要基石。目前，两国已经建立全面战略伙伴关系，这是中国同拉美国家关系的最高水平定位，体现了双方高水平的政治互信。	
Peru was one of the first Latin American countries to establish diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China. Over the past 45 years of our diplomatic relations, we have treated each other with respect and equality, firmly supported each other on issues concerning our respective core interests and major concerns and developed strong political trust, which formed the cornerstone of China-Peru relations. Our two countries have established a comprehensive strategic partnership, the highest level of relations between China and Latin American countries, which embodies the high degree of our political mutual trust.
尽管近年来世界经济形势“寒风凛冽”，但中秘务实合作“春意盎然”。两国贸易保持增长势头。2015年，双边贸易额近150亿美元，创历史新高。今年1至8月，双边贸易额同比增长9%，其中秘鲁对华出口增长21.8%。多年来，中国一直是秘鲁第一大贸易伙伴、第一大出口市场、第一大进口来源国。秘鲁成为吸引中国投资最多的拉美国家之一，超过170家中国企业在秘鲁投资兴业，各类投资累计超过140亿美元，为秘鲁创造了上万个就业岗位，增加了政府税收，有力带动了当地经济社会发展。	
Despite the wintry state of the global economy in recent years, China and Peru are enjoying spring in their practical cooperation. Bilateral trade has remained on an upward trajectory, hitting a record level of nearly 15 billion U.S. dollars in 2015. In the first eight months of this year, trade grew by 9 percent year-on-year, outpaced by a 21.8 percent uptick in Peruvian exports to China. China has been Peru's largest trading partner, export market and source of import for years, and Peru has become one of the top destinations in Latin America for Chinese investment. Over 170 Chinese businesses have invested more than 14 billion dollars in Peru, helping to create tens of thousands of jobs and new sources of tax revenue for local communities and benefiting economic and social development in this country.
中秘人文交流十分活跃，两国人民感情好上加好、亲上加亲。双方文化、教育、科技、卫生、媒体、智库、青年、司法等领域交流合作不断增多，越来越多秘鲁民众特别是青年学生希望学习汉语、了解中华文化。秘鲁4所孔子学院注册学员超过4000名。我们欢迎更多秘鲁人到中国走一走、看一看。中国人民欣赏印加文明，越来越多中国人希望来秘鲁旅游观光。	
The robust people-to-people exchanges between Chinese and Peruvian peoples have brought them even closer to each other. Exchanges and cooperation in culture, education, science and technology, health and the judicial sector as well as between media, think tanks and youths are growing. More and more Peruvians, especially students, want to study Chinese and learn more about Chinese culture. The four Confucius Institutes in Peru have attracted more than 4,000 registered students. We welcome more Peruvians to visit China. More and more Chinese admirers of the Inca civilization are hoping to visit Peru as tourists.
中秘两国在国际和地区事务中也保持着密切沟通和协调，共同维护发展中国家整体利益。无论是在联合国改革、气候变化、可持续发展等重大国际议题上，还是在促进亚太合作、拉美一体化、中拉整体合作等地区性问题上，我们两国总是有着相同或相似立场，彼此呼应、相互支持。	
China and Peru have maintained close communication and coordination on international and regional affairs to jointly uphold the common interests of developing countries. We hold the same or similar views and have consistently echoed and supported each other's positions, be it on key international issues such as UN reform, climate change, sustainable development or regional ones like Asia-Pacific cooperation, Latin American integration and cooperation between China and Latin America.
我认为，中秘关系之所以发展蓬勃、动力强劲，得益于两国友好的牢固民意基础，得益于双方极强的经贸互补性和合作意愿，得益于两国历届政府均重视发展双边关系的正确抉择。当前，中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力，秘鲁人民也在为2021年独立200周年之际建成“公正、公平、团结的秘鲁”而不懈努力。我们梦想相同、心灵相通，深化全方位合作恰逢其时。	
I believe that the tremendous progress and strong momentum in China-Peru ties is attributable to the extensive public support for our friendship, to our enormous economic complementarity and enthusiasm toward cooperation and to the right decision of successive governments of both countries to place high importance on this relationship. The Chinese people are working vigorously to attain the two centenary goals, namely, completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the Communist Party's centenary in 2021 and building a prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious country by the centenary of the People's Republic in 2049, and the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The Peruvian people are making relentless efforts toward a just, fair and united Peru by the bicentennial of Peru's independence in 2021. Cherishing the same dream and vision, it is only natural that we should push forward all-round cooperation.
——我们要深化政治互信，在前进道路上结伴同行。双方要坚持从战略高度和长远角度看待两国关系，理解和支持对方核心利益和重大关切，确保中秘关系长期稳定发展。我多次说过，“鞋子合不合脚，只有自己知道”。中国支持秘鲁探索符合本国国情的发展道路，愿同秘方加强治国理政经验交流，在各自国家建设中取得更大成就。	
-- We need to deepen political mutual trust and remain partners for each other on the way ahead. We should continue to view our relations from a strategic and long-term perspective, understand and support each other on issues concerning core interests and major concerns and ensure the sustained and steady growth of bilateral ties. I have said on many occasions, "Only the wearer knows if the shoes fit or not." China supports Peru in exploring a development path suited to its national conditions and stands ready to enhance the sharing of experience on governance to make greater achievements in our respective development endeavors.
——我们要扩大务实合作，推动实现共同发展繁荣。中秘是天然合作伙伴，务实合作领域宽、规模大、成果多，建立了经济合作战略对话、经济贸易混合委员会等机制。双方要通过制定和实施两国共同行动计划，统筹推进下阶段务实合作。中方建议加强两国产能和投资合作，愿为秘方提供工业化所需全部装备和技术，并提供人员培训和配套融资，帮助秘鲁实现经济多元化发展，实现两国合作质量和效益双丰收。	
-- We need to expand practical cooperation and promote common development and prosperity. China and Peru are natural partners on the strength of our wide-ranging, large-scale and fruitful cooperation. We have set up mechanisms such as the strategic dialogue on economic cooperation and the joint committee on economic cooperation and trade. We need to formulate and implement a well-structured action plan to guide our practical cooperation in the years to come. China suggests that we intensify production capacity and investment cooperation. We are ready to provide Peru with all the equipment and technology it needs for industrialization, supported by personnel training and matching funds. This will be conducive to Peru's efforts toward diversified economic development, and raise the quality and efficiency of bilateral cooperation.
——我们要加强文明互鉴，夯实中秘关系民意基础。国之交在于民相亲。我们要扩大文化、教育、科技、旅游等领域交流合作，为两国人民加强往来提供更多便利。中方欢迎更多秘鲁学生来华学习，推动两国青年加强交流，让两国传统友谊薪火相传。	
-- We need to promote cultural exchange and cement public support for our relations. Amity between the people holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. We need to expand exchanges and cooperation in culture, education, science and technology and tourism and facilitate the interflow of people between our two countries. China welcomes more Peruvian students to study in China and supports more youth exchanges to pass on our traditional friendship from one generation to the next.
——我们要加强在国际和地区事务中的协作，维护共同利益。世界持久和平、持续发展进步是人类的共同心愿。中方愿同秘方一道，在重大国际和地区问题上密切沟通和配合，共同推进以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，为打造人类命运共同体和利益共同体作出贡献。	
-- We need to strengthen cooperation in international and regional affairs to uphold common interests. Lasting peace and sustained progress is the shared aspiration of all humanity. China hopes to work with Peru to maintain close communication and cooperation on major international issues, build a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation and contribute to a community of shared interests and shared future for all mankind.
中秘友好的历史接力棒已经传到我们手中。让我们携手前行、密切合作，共圆两国人民追求幸福生活的梦想，促进世界和平、稳定、繁荣！	
The baton of China-Peru friendship is now passed to us. Let us join hands and work closely together to pursue the dream of our people for a happy life and promote peace, stability and prosperity of the world.