21. 习近平在希腊媒体发表署名文章《让古老文明的智慧照鉴未来》
让古老文明的智慧照鉴未来
Let Wisdom of Ancient Civilizations Shine Through the Future中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
很高兴应帕夫洛普洛斯总统邀请，对美丽的希腊进行国事访问。2014年我曾过境罗德岛，希腊古老厚重的文明、勤劳智慧的人民给我留下了深刻印象。我将怀着对文明的尊重和对未来的期许，再次踏上希腊这个美丽的国度，我对此感到由衷的高兴。
It is my great pleasure to pay a state visit to the beautiful country of Greece at the invitation of President Prokopis Pavlopoulos. In 2014, I made a stopover on Rhodes, and was deeply impressed by the ancient and rich Greek civilization and the hard-working and talented Greek people. It is with great respect for civilizations and high expectations for a bright future that I will once again visit this beautiful country, something I very much look forward to.
伟大的古老文明都是相似的。2000多年前，古代中国、古代希腊的文明之光就在亚欧大陆两端交相辉映。古希腊哲学和文学泰斗辈出的黄金时代，恰恰也是中国“百家争鸣”的思想迸发期。曾两次访问中国的希腊文学巨匠卡赞扎基斯有一句名言，“苏格拉底和孔子是人类的两张面具，面具之下是同一张人类理性的面孔”。古希腊“智者学派”萌发的人本主义思想同中国儒家坚持的“以民为本”理念有异曲同工之妙。第欧根尼同中国道家代表人物庄子倡导类似的生活方式和生活理念。
Great civilizations have much in common to offer each other. More than 2,000 years ago, ancient Chinese and Greek civilizations shone brightly in Asia and Europe. Greek's golden era produced many of its great philosophers and literary giants. That coincided with a period in China when "a hundred schools of thought contended with each other" and flourished together. Nikos Kazantzakis, a giant of modern Greek literature who had visited China twice, commented that "Confucius and Socrates were two masks that covered the same face of human logic." Humanism, which traces its origin to the Sophists of ancient Greece, resonates with the Confucian teaching that "people are the roots of a country." One can also find much similarity between the lifestyle and philosophy of Diogenes and Zhuangzi, a leading Daoist philosopher who lived around the 4th century BC in China.
伟大的古老文明都是相知的。公元前4世纪，古希腊人给遥远的中国起了一个美丽的名字“丝之国”。16世纪欧几里德的《几何原本》传入中国，成为中西科学交流的先导。古希腊戏剧家埃斯库罗斯塑造的普罗米修斯形象曾经激发中国革命志士仁人的昂扬斗志。柏拉图的《理想国》、亚里士多德的《政治学》也早就传入了中国。
Great civilizations understand each other better. As early as the 4th century BC, China was known to the Greeks by a beautiful name: Sērikḗ. In the 16th century, Euclid's Elements was introduced into China, paving the way for scientific exchanges between China and the West. The story of Prometheus narrated by Aeschylus was an inspiration to many Chinese revolutionaries. The Republic by Plato and Politics by Aristotle are also among those Greek classics that have long made names for themselves in China.
伟大的古老文明更是相亲的。新中国成立后，是希腊船东率先冲破封锁，为中国送来宝贵物资和设备。当希腊面对经济和债务问题时，中国全心全意帮助希腊朋友渡过难关。2011年2月利比亚战火纷飞时，克里特岛的朋友们克服冬歇期的困难，重开酒店接待自利比亚撤离的数千名中国公民。希腊中国友好协会60年如一日坚持“为两国人民的友好交往工作到老”，中国翻译家罗念生一家三代致力于希腊文学、戏剧的翻译和研究，为增进两国人民友谊作出了重要贡献。
Great civilizations always stand by each other. After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, Greek shipowners were among the first to break through the blockade and send much-needed supplies and equipment to New China. When Greece was plagued by economic and debt woes a decade ago, China provided wholehearted assistance to help our Greek friends emerge from the hard time. When conflict and war raged in Libya in February 2011, hoteliers on Crete, though in winter recess, provided accommodation to thousands of Chinese citizens evacuated from Libya. For over sixty years, year in and year out, the Greece-China Association has been committed to advancing the friendly exchanges between our two nations. The late Prof. Luo Niansheng, a renowned Chinese scholar and translator, is remembered for his life long dedication to the translation and research of Greek literature and for his important contribution to furthering our friendship, a legacy carried on by his son and granddaughter.
1972年中希建交，特别是2006年两国建立全面战略伙伴关系以来，双方坚持互尊互信，从战略高度和长远角度坚定发展双边关系；坚持合作共赢，推动贸易投资、基础设施建设等合作取得丰硕成果，将比雷埃夫斯港打造为地中海第一大港；坚持交流互鉴，向全世界展示了伟大古老文明的和合之美。中希关系发展彰显了文明古国在现代社会互利合作的勃勃生机。
Since we entered into diplomatic ties in 1972 and particularly since we established a comprehensive strategic partnership in 2006, China and Greece have always treated each other with respect and trust, and developed our relationship from a strategic, long-term perspective. We have pursued mutually beneficial cooperation, achieved fruitful outcomes in trade, investment and infrastructure cooperation, and worked together to turn Piraeus into the largest port in the Mediterranean. We have learned from each other through cultural exchanges and shown to the world the harmony of two great and celebrated civilizations. The growth of China-Greece relations is testimony that ancient civilizations are capable of dynamic, mutually beneficial cooperation in modern times.
中国和希腊都曾经历艰难困苦，但两国人民始终保持着自强不息的奋斗精神。当前，两国都处在国家发展新的历史时期，双边关系面临新的历史机遇。我愿通过这次访问，同希腊领导人一道，共同描绘中希关系发展的新蓝图。
China and Greece have both been through trials and tribulations in history. This nurtures in our people a great resilience and a determination to strive forward. Today, China and Greece have both reached a new stage of development, which presents a golden opportunity for expanding our ties. During my visit, I hope to work with your leaders to map out a brighter future for our relations.
我们要全面提升中希关系战略水平，保持密切交往势头，不断增进相互了解和信任，继续支持彼此核心利益和重大关切，做全面合作的战略伙伴。
We need to raise the strategic level of China-Greece relations in all respects, maintain the strong momentum of engagement, continually enhance mutual understanding and trust, and render further support for each other's core interests and major concerns. This will make us strategic partners engaged in all-round cooperation.
我们要扎实提升各领域务实合作水平，以比雷埃夫斯港口项目为龙头，不断拓宽合作领域、扩大投资规模。中方愿进口更多希腊优质农产品，丰富中国消费者的选择，也希望希腊市场对中国企业和产品继续敞开大门，做互利共赢的伙伴。
We need to improve all areas of our practical cooperation with concrete efforts, broaden cooperation areas and upscale our investment ties with the Port of Piraeus as a flagship project. China is ready to import more quality agricultural products from Greece to provide our consumers with more choices. We hope Greece will open its market wider to Chinese companies and products. This will make our partnership one of mutual benefit.
我们要加紧提升共建“一带一路”合作水平，充分利用希腊区位和海运能力优势，把握希腊加入中国－中东欧国家合作机制的机遇，积极推进中欧陆海快线等务实合作，助力中欧互联互通平台发展，做中欧合作的典范。
We need to step up Belt and Road cooperation with down-to-earth efforts, make the most of the location and shipping capacity of Greece, seize the opportunities brought by Greece's joining the China-CEEC cooperation, actively advance practical projects under the China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line, and contribute to the China-EU Connectivity Platform. This will make us front-runners in China-Europe cooperation.
我们要促进文化交流合作，办好雅典孔子学院和雅典中国文化中心，持续扩大两国人员交往，从两国悠久的文明中汲取源源不断的滋养，做文明对话的表率。
We need to strengthen our cultural exchanges and cooperation, ensure the continued success of the Confucius Institute and China Cultural Center in Athens, and expand people-to-people exchanges to draw further strength from our time-honored civilizations. This will make us a model of dialogue between civilizations.
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。70年来，特别是改革开放40多年来，亿万中国人民不懈奋斗，取得了举世瞩目的发展成就。同时，中国也以自身的和平发展积极回应着世界如何发展的时代命题。当前，国际形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，不稳定性不确定性增多。中希应该挖掘古老文明的深邃智慧，展现文明古国的历史担当，共同推动构建相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系，共同推动构建人类命运共同体。
This year we celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. For 70 years, particularly since the start of reform and opening-up over four decades ago, the over one billion Chinese people have worked hard and made phenomenal progress. Through its own peaceful development, China is trying to answer the great question of our time: What should the future of our world look like? The international landscape is undergoing profound and complex transformation amid growing uncertainty and instability. China and Greece, each with a strong sense of history and responsibility, can tap our civilizations for wisdom and build a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, equity, justice and mutually beneficial cooperation. Together, we can usher in a community with a shared future for all mankind.