43. 习近平在巴布亚新几内亚媒体发表署名文章《让中国同太平洋岛国关系扬帆再启航》
让中国同太平洋岛国关系扬帆再启航
Set Sail on a New Voyage for Relations Between China and Pacific Island Countries
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
我即将对著名的“天堂鸟之国”巴布亚新几内亚进行国事访问，并出席在巴新举行的亚太经合组织第二十六次领导人非正式会议。这将是我首次到访巴新，也是中国国家主席首次对巴新进行国事访问。我对此充满期待。
I will soon pay a state visit to Papua New Guinea, famed as home to the birds of paradise, and attend the 26th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting there. It will not only be my first visit to the country, but also the first-ever state visit by a Chinese President. I have great expectations for this trip.
巴新是面积最大、人口最多的太平洋岛国，自然资源丰富，发展潜力巨大，是一片充满希望的热土。近年来，在奥尼尔总理领导下，巴新政府和人民积极进取、奋发图强，国家发展欣欣向荣，社会面貌焕然一新。我衷心祝愿巴新在国家建设和经济社会发展的道路上不断取得新的更大成就，预祝巴新这次主办亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议获得圆满成功。
Being the largest and most populous Pacific island country and endowed with abundant natural resources, Papua New Guinea has enormous potential for development and is truly a land of great promise. In recent years, thanks to the leadership of Prime Minister Peter O’Neill and great work of the government and the industrious and enterprising people of this country, Papua New Guinea has thrived in national development and its society has taken on a new look. I sincerely wish Papua New Guinea even greater achievements in economic and social development and full success in hosting this year’s APEC meeting.
中国同巴新友好交往源远流长。早在100多年前就有华人漂洋过海来到这里，扎根当地、辛勤劳动，为巴新经济社会发展作出了重要贡献。1976年两国建交以来，双方坚持相互尊重、平等相待、互利共赢，中国同巴新关系经受住了国际风云变幻考验，历久弥新。
China’s friendly interactions with Papua New Guinea go a long way back. More than 100 years ago, there were Chinese travelling across the seas to Papua New Guinea who settled down and, with their hard work, made important contribution to the economic and social development of the country. China and Papua New Guinea established diplomatic relations in 1976. Since then, our two countries have treated each other with respect and as equals, and have pursued mutual benefit and win-win cooperation. Our relationship has stood the test of changing international circumstances and stayed as strong as ever.
近年来，两国关系进入了快速发展的新阶段。巴新是中国在太平洋岛国地区第一大贸易伙伴，中国成为巴新第一大外资来源地和第一大工程承包方。中国援建的独立大道、国际会议中心将为巴新主办这次亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议发挥重要作用；中国医疗队16年如一日为巴新民众提供人道主义医疗服务；使用中国政府优惠贷款建设的水电站、医院、校舍成为巴新各地的新地标；中国公司积极响应巴新政府提出的“2030发展战略”，在巴新全国参与建设公路、桥梁、机场、码头。
In recent years, bilateral ties have entered a new stage of rapid growth. Today, Papua New Guinea is China’s largest trading partner in the region, while China is the biggest foreign investor and project contractor in this country. For example, the Independence Boulevard and International Convention Centre, which will play an important role in Papua New Guinea’s hosting of the APEC meeting, are both built with Chinese assistance. For sixteen years running, Chinese medical teams have provided humanitarian health services to the people of Papua New Guinea. Hydropower stations, hospitals and school dormitories financed by Chinese government concessional loans have become landmark buildings across the country. And in an active response to the PNG government’s Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030, Chinese companies have taken part in the construction of roads, bridges, airports and docks locally.
18年前，我担任中国福建省省长期间，曾推动实施福建省援助巴新东高地省菌草、旱稻种植技术示范项目。我高兴地得知，这一项目持续运作至今，发挥了很好的经济社会效益，成为中国同巴新关系发展的一段佳话。
Eighteen years ago when I was Governor of China’s Fujian Province, I personally pushed for a demonstration project to help the Eastern Highland Province with mushroom and upland rice planting. I am glad to learn that this project, still in operation to this day, has produced good economic and social benefits for the local community and become a success story in the growth of China-Papua New Guinea relations.
我期待着通过这次访问，同巴新方一道努力，增进相互信任，拓展务实合作，扩大人文交流，推动中国同巴新关系再上新台阶。
In my upcoming visit, I look forward to working with your leaders to cement mutual trust, expand practical cooperation, and increase people-to-people exchanges in order to take our bilateral ties to a new level.
中国同巴新关系的迅速发展，是中国同太平洋岛国整体关系发展的缩影。4年前，我在斐济楠迪同8个建交太平洋岛国领导人举行集体会晤，各方一致同意建立相互尊重、共同发展的战略伙伴关系，中国同岛国关系进入了新的历史时期，焕发出新的勃勃生机。中国和岛国在推动双边关系发展实践中，坚持了以下原则。
The rapid growth of China-Papua New Guinea relations is an epitome of China’s overall relations with Pacific island countries. Four years ago in Nadi, Fiji, I had a group meeting with leaders of the eight Pacific island countries having diplomatic ties with China, during which we agreed to forge a strategic partnership featuring mutual respect and common development, thus heralding a new dynamic stage in our relations. The following principles have been adhered to in the development of relations between China and Pacific island countries.
——坚持相互尊重。中国和岛国视彼此为真诚朋友和友好伙伴。中方坚持大小国家一律平等，坚定支持岛国人民走符合自身国情的发展道路，支持岛国在国际事务中发挥应有作用。岛国在涉及中国核心利益和重大关切问题上长期给予中方宝贵支持。
– We have stayed committed to treating each other with mutual respect. China and Pacific island countries take each other as true friends and good partners. China believes that all countries are equal, regardless of their size. We support the people of Pacific island countries in pursuing development paths suited to their national circumstances and support Pacific island countries in playing a due role in international affairs. On their part, Pacific island countries have, for decades, lent valuable support to China on issues involving China’s core interests and major concerns.
——坚持深化合作。中国同岛国经贸交往日益密切，经济技术合作更加深入，共同利益的蛋糕不断做大。巴新的液化天然气、斐济的矿泉水、汤加的南瓜、密克罗尼西亚联邦的金枪鱼等特色商品已经成功进入中国市场。中国在力所能及范围内为岛国发展建设提供支持和援助，为促进岛国经济发展、增进人民福祉作出了贡献。
– We have stayed committed to deepening cooperation. Closer business ties and deeper economic and technological cooperation have made the pie of common interests between China and Pacific island countries even larger. A number of island specialties, including liquefied natural gas of Papua New Guinea, mineral water of Fiji, squash pumpkin of Tonga, and tuna fish of the Federated States of Micronesia, have made their way into the Chinese market. China has done what it can to support and assist in the development of the island countries, thus contributing to economic growth and people’s welfare in this part of the world.
——坚持民心相通。中国赴岛国游客年均超过10万人次。大量岛国青年学生、政府官员、技术人员到中国学习深造、考察研修。双方文艺团组交流互访频繁。中国海军“和平方舟”医院船访问巴新、斐济、汤加、瓦努阿图，为2万多名岛国民众提供了人道主义诊疗服务。
– We have stayed committed to building people-to-people links. Over 100,000 Chinese tourists visit Pacific island countries each year. Students, government officials and technicians from Pacific island countries also visit or study in China in large numbers. There have been frequent exchanges between cultural and art troupes of the two sides. China’s hospital ship “Peace Ark” has visited Papua New Guinea, Fiji, Tonga and Vanuatu, providing humanitarian medical services to more than 20,000 local people.
“相知无远近，万里尚为邻。”事实证明，浩瀚的太平洋是中国同岛国关系发展的纽带。放眼全球，新一轮科技革命和产业变革深入发展，如何把握机遇、共克时艰、加快发展，是中国和岛国共同的历史任务，也是双方人民共同的美好心愿。这次访问巴新期间，我再次邀请8个建交太平洋岛国领导人在巴新相聚，共叙友好情谊，共商发展大计，让中国同岛国关系扬帆再启航。
The Chinese often say, “Distance cannot separate true friends who remain close even when thousands of miles apart.” The vast Pacific Ocean is indeed a bond between China and Pacific island countries. As the new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation gains momentum across the world, our two sides face the common task to seize opportunities, overcome difficulties and speed up development, as this meets the shared aspiration of both our peoples. During my visit to Papua New Guinea, I will invite leaders of the eight Pacific island countries that have diplomatic relations with China to join me once again in a gathering to renew friendship, explore new ways of development and chart the course for future growth of our relations.
第一，战略互信要再上新台阶。中国将同包括太平洋岛国在内的广大发展中国家坚定站在一起。中方将秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观加强同太平洋岛国的团结合作，支持岛国发展，促进缩小南北发展差距。中国愿和岛国共同推动构建新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体。
First, we need to bring our strategic trust to a higher level. China will stand firm with Pacific island countries and all other developing countries. Following a policy of pursuing the greater good and shared interests under the principles of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith, China will enhance solidarity and cooperation with Pacific island countries, support their development, and help narrow down the development gap between the North and the South. China will work with Pacific island countries to build a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
第二，共同发展要再添新动力。中方愿扩大同岛国在贸易和投资等领域务实合作，欢迎太平洋岛国根据自身条件和优势，结合本国发展战略和规划积极参与共建“一带一路”。相信共建“一带一路”将为中国同岛国、各个岛国之间以及岛国同世界其他国家加强经贸联系和互联互通、更好参与经济全球化进程提供新的路径。
Second, we need to lend fresh impetus to our common development. China will expand practical cooperation with Pacific island countries in trade and investment, and encourage their active participation in the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) in line with their own national conditions, strengths and development strategies. I am convinced that the BRI will open up new pathways for Pacific island countries to enhance business ties and connectivity with China, among themselves and with the rest of the world, and for the island countries to take a greater part in economic globalisation.
第三，人民友谊要再谱新篇章。岛国有句谚语：“友谊是沙漠中的水渠。”我们愿同岛国不断扩大文化、教育、卫生、体育、青年、地方、人力资源培训等领域交流合作，欢迎更多太平洋岛国朋友到中国旅游观光、留学深造、投资经商、考察访问，加深双方人民相互了解和友谊，让双方友好事业薪火相传。
Third, we need to write a new chapter in people-to-people friendship. As an island idiom goes, “Friendship is a furrow in the sand.” China will continue to increase exchange and cooperation with Pacific island countries in culture, education, medical services, sports, youth and human resources training and at the sub-national level. We also welcome friends from these countries to visit, study, invest or do business in China. This will help deepen mutual understanding and friendship between our peoples and carry forward our friendship from generation to generation.
我这次访问巴新期间还将出席亚太经合组织第二十六次领导人非正式会议。这是巴新也是太平洋岛国首次主办亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，可以说是整个岛国地区的一件盛事。我期待着同各成员一道，聚焦“把握包容性机遇，拥抱数字化未来”主题，就区域经济一体化、数字经济、互联互通、可持续和包容增长等重要议题进行深入交流，为本地区和平、稳定、发展作出新贡献。
During my upcoming visit, I will attend the 26th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting. It will be the first time for Papua New Guinea, and indeed for a Pacific island country, to play APEC host. It will be a huge event for the entire region. Under the theme of “Harnessing Inclusive Opportunities, Embracing the Digital Future,” I look forward to an in-depth exchange of views with other member economies on regional economic integration, digital economy, connectivity, and sustainable and inclusive growth, so that we could jointly contribute to peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific region.
当前，中国同太平洋岛国关系发展正处于历史最好时期，面临重要发展机遇。中国愿同太平洋岛国一道努力，乘风破浪，向着双方关系更加美好的明天扬帆再启航！
The relations between China and Pacific island countries are now better than ever and face important opportunities of development. China will work with Pacific island countries to brave the wind and waves and set sail for a brighter future of our relations.