13. 习近平在2020年中国国际服务贸易交易会全球服务贸易峰会上的致辞
（2020年9月4日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Global Trade in Services Summit of
The 2020 China International Fair for Trade in Services
Beijing, 4 September 2020
尊敬的各国领导人，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各代表团团长，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Leaders of Participating Countries,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Your Excellencies Heads of Delegation,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
大家好！值此2020年中国国际服务贸易交易会举办之际，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对参与本次大会的线上线下所有嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！对世界各地的新老朋友们，表示诚挚的问候和美好的祝愿！
Good evening! As the 2020 China International Fair for Trade in Services (CIFTIS) opens, I wish to extend, on behalf of the government and people of China and in my own name, a hearty welcome to all the guests attending in person or via the Internet! To the many old and new friends from across the world, I give you my warmest greetings and best wishes!
在过去的几个月里，中国人民同各国人民一道，相互支持、相互帮助，共同为抗击新冠肺炎疫情、应对疫情带来的全球性挑战作出了艰苦努力。当前，全球范围疫情尚未得到全面控制，各国都面临着抗疫情、稳经济、保民生的艰巨任务。在这一背景下，中国克服重重困难，举办这样一场重大国际经贸活动，就是要同大家携手努力、共克时艰，共同促进全球服务贸易发展繁荣，推动世界经济尽快复苏。
Over the past few months, the people of China and other countries have supported and helped each other in a tenacious fight against COVID-19 and the global challenges that have come with it. Today, with COVID-19 yet to be brought under full control at the global level, all countries face the formidable task to defeat the virus, stabilize the economy, and protect livelihoods. It is against such a backdrop that China decided to hold this important international trade event despite many difficulties in preparation. It shows China's willingness to join hands with all of you in this trying time and work together to enable global trade in services to thrive and the world economy to recover at an early date.
中国国际服务贸易交易会，是专门为服务贸易搭建的国家级、国际性、综合型大规模展会和交易平台，自2012年起，已举办6届。本届中国国际服务贸易交易会以“全球服务，互惠共享”为主题。希望以此为契机，搭建起平台和桥梁，让各国人民充分展示服务贸易领域新发展新突破，共同享受人类社会发展进步新技术新成果。我们期待与会嘉宾深入交流、加强合作，为深化服务贸易和投资合作、增强经济社会发展活力贡献智慧和力量。
CIFTIS is a large exhibition and trading platform dedicated to trade in services. This comprehensive, state-level event with a global reach has already been held six times since 2012. We hope that this year's CIFTIS, held under the theme of "Global Services, Shared Prosperity", will present an opportunity and serve as a platform and a bridge for people from across the world to fully showcase the new progress and breakthroughs in services trade and share in the new technologies and benefits of human progress. We hope that through in-depth exchanges and closer cooperation, delegates participating in the event could contribute your wisdom and energy to deepening cooperation on trade and investment in services and invigorating economic and social development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局。新冠肺炎疫情全球大流行使这个大变局加速变化，经济全球化遭遇逆流，保护主义、单边主义上升，世界经济低迷，国际贸易和投资大幅萎缩，给人类生产生活带来前所未有的挑战和考验。
Our world is going through profound changes unseen in a century, and the COVID-19 pandemic is accelerating such changes. Economic globalization has run up against headwinds; protectionism and unilateralism are on the rise; the world economy is in the doldrums; and international trade and investment have slumped. Such are the unprecedented challenges and tests in the work and life of mankind.
同时，我们也要看到，近年来，新一轮科技革命和产业变革孕育兴起，带动了数字技术强势崛起，促进了产业深度融合，引领了服务经济蓬勃发展。这次疫情全球大流行期间，远程医疗、在线教育、共享平台、协同办公、跨境电商等服务广泛应用，对促进各国经济稳定、推动国际抗疫合作发挥了重要作用。放眼未来，服务业开放合作正日益成为推动发展的重要力量。
That said, let us not forget that a new round of technological and industrial revolution in recent years has spurred a boom in digital technologies, deepened the integration of industries, and allowed the service economy to flourish. During this pandemic, certain services have been widely used: telemedicine, e-learning, sharing platforms, collaboration systems, and cross-border e-commerce, to name just a few. They have played an important part in ensuring economic stability in individual countries and promoting international cooperation against COVID-19. Going forward, open cooperation in the services sector will become an increasingly important driver for development.
借此机会，我愿提出3点倡议。
Here, I would like to take this opportunity to share with you the following three thoughts and suggestions.
第一，共同营造开放包容的合作环境。纵观人类社会发展史，世界经济开放则兴，封闭则衰。服务业因其独特的轻资产、软要素等特点，更加需要开放、透明、包容、非歧视的行业发展生态，更加需要各国努力减少制约要素流动的“边境上”和“边境后”壁垒，推动跨境互联互通。中国将坚定不移扩大对外开放，建立健全跨境服务贸易负面清单管理制度，推进服务贸易创新发展试点开放平台建设，继续放宽服务业市场准入，主动扩大优质服务进口。中国将积极顺应服务贸易发展实际需要，推动多边、区域等层面服务规则协调，不断完善全球经济治理，促进世界经济包容性增长。
First, let us work together to foster an open and inclusive environment for cooperation. A review of human history shows that the world economy thrives in openness and withers in seclusion. The services sector is unique as it is asset-light but heavy in soft factors of production. As such, it requires, more than other sectors, an open, transparent, inclusive and non-discriminatory environment for businesses to grow. It calls for the concerted efforts of all countries to reduce border and behind-the-border barriers constraining the flow of production factors and promote cross-border connectivity. China will remain steadfast in opening up wider to the world. We will continue to work on a negative list system for managing cross-border services trade. We will develop open platforms for the pilot program of innovative development of the services sector. We will further ease market access for the services sector, and will take greater initiative to increase imports of quality services. To meet the actual needs for growing trade in services, China will promote greater harmonization of rules for the services sector at the multilateral and regional levels, and work for continued improvement in global economic governance and more inclusive growth of the world economy.
第二，共同激活创新引领的合作动能。我们要顺应数字化、网络化、智能化发展趋势，共同致力于消除“数字鸿沟”，助推服务贸易数字化进程。中国将拓展特色服务出口基地，发展服务贸易新业态新模式。中国愿同各国一道，加强宏观政策协调，加快数字领域国际合作，加大知识产权保护，积极促进数字经济、共享经济等蓬勃发展，推动世界经济不断焕发生机活力。
Second, let us work together to unleash the power of innovation in driving cooperation forward. We need to adapt to the trend towards digital-driven, Internet-based and smart growth, jointly eliminate the "digital divide", and advance digitalization of trade in services. China will continue to build bases for featured services export and develop new business forms and models in services trade. China will work with other countries to enhance macro policy coordination, accelerate international cooperation in the digital sector, step up intellectual property protection, and facilitate the vibrant growth of the digital economy and sharing economy. Such efforts will generate renewed dynamism for the world economy.
第三，共同开创互利共赢的合作局面。经济全球化背景下，各国经济彼此依存，利益交融前所未有，以诚相待、普惠共享是根本之计。各国要加强服务贸易发展对接，创新合作方式，深化合作领域，积极寻求发展利益最大公约数，不断做大“蛋糕”。中国将充分利用中国国际服务贸易交易会、中国国际进口博览会等各类平台，推动开展政策和经验交流，建立和培育政府间、国际组织、商协会及企业间多样化伙伴关系，支持组建全球服务贸易联盟，不断形成更多务实合作成果，使各国人民共同享有服务贸易增长成果。
Third, let us work together to promote mutually beneficial cooperation. In this age of economic globalization, countries share economic interdependency and intertwined interests like never before. To treat each other with sincerity and pursue shared benefits holds the key to state-to-state relations in today's world. Countries need to forge greater synergy in growing their trade in services, seek new ways and more areas of cooperation, and look for the widest possible converging interests in development so as to make the "pie" bigger and bigger. China will make full use of CIFTIS and other platforms such as the China International Import Expo to promote policy exchange and experience-sharing, and foster diverse partnerships with foreign governments, international organizations, business associations and enterprises. China supports the establishment of a global alliance for trade in services. We hope to see more fruits from our practical cooperation so that people in different countries will all benefit from a growing trade in services.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
为更好发挥北京在中国服务业开放中的引领作用，我们将支持北京打造国家服务业扩大开放综合示范区，加大先行先试力度，探索更多可复制可推广经验；设立以科技创新、服务业开放、数字经济为主要特征的自由贸易试验区，构建京津冀协同发展的高水平开放平台，带动形成更高层次改革开放新格局。
To better leverage Beijing's role in spearheading the opening-up of China's services sector, we will support the municipality in developing a national integrated demonstration zone for greater openness in the services sector. It will enable Beijing to take bigger, bolder steps as a trailblazer and gain more experience that would be replicable and scalable. We will also support Beijing in setting up a pilot free trade zone characterizing scientific and technological innovation, opening-up of the services sector, and digital economy. It will serve as a platform of high-standard opening-up for the coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, and open up new horizons for reform and opening-up at a higher level.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情，在一段时间内阻隔了我们的相聚，但阻挡不了服务贸易发展的脚步，阻断不了我们携手共进、合作共赢的信心和行动！让我们齐心协力、携手前行，以坚定的步伐走出人类历史上这段艰难时期，共同迎接世界更加美好的未来！
The sudden attack of COVID-19 may have prevented us from meeting face to face, but it cannot block the growth of trade in services. Nor will it affect our confidence and action as we pursue shared progress and mutually beneficial cooperation. Let us pull together and strengthen our resolve to get over this difficult period for mankind. Let us move to embrace a better tomorrow for the world.
最后，预祝会议取得圆满成功！
To conclude, I wish CIFTIS a great success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.