46. 习近平在2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会开幕式上的主旨讲话
携手共命运　同心促发展
——在2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会开幕式上的主旨讲话
（2018年9月3日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together for Common Development and a Shared Future  
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping  
President of the People's Republic of China  
At the Opening Ceremony of the 2018 Beijing Summit  
Of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation  
Beijing, 3 September 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的非洲联盟轮值主席卡加梅总统，
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑、代表团团长，
尊敬的联合国秘书长古特雷斯先生，
尊敬的非洲联盟委员会主席法基先生，
女士们，先生们，
朋友们：
Your Excellency President Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, 
Your Excellency President Paul Kagame, Chairperson of the African Union, 
Distinguished Heads of State and Government, 
Distinguished Heads of Delegation, 
Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, 
Your Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the AU Commission, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Friends,
九月的北京，金风送爽，秋色怡人。在这美好的季节，中非友好大家庭的新老朋友们再次相聚，共襄2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会盛举，我们感到十分高兴。
September has just set in Beijing, bringing with it refreshing breeze and picturesque autumn scenery. And we are so delighted to have all of you with us, friends both old and new, in this lovely season for the reunion of the China-Africa big family at the 2018 Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC).
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位同事和嘉宾的到来表示热烈的欢迎！我也愿通过你们，向兄弟的非洲人民转达中国人民的诚挚问候和良好祝愿！
I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, a very warm welcome to all of you, dear colleagues and guests. I also wish to extend, through you, the best regards and cordial greetings of the Chinese people to the brotherly people of Africa.
我要特别提到的是，自约翰内斯堡峰会以来，中非合作论坛相继增加了冈比亚、圣多美和普林西比、布基纳法索3名新成员。今天，巴罗总统、特罗瓦达总理、卡博雷总统分别率领三国代表团出席北京峰会，让我们以热烈的掌声欢迎他们！
I wish to mention in particular that since the Johannesburg Summit, FOCAC has had three new members, namely, the Gambia, Sao Tome and Principe and Burkina Faso. Today, we are joined by President Barrow, Prime Minister Trovoada and President Kabore and their delegations. Let us welcome them with a warm round of applause!
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
一个多月前，我以中国国家主席身份第四次访问了非洲，这也是我本人第九次踏上非洲这片热土。访问期间，我再次目睹了非洲大地富饶美丽，非洲发展充满生机，非洲人民渴望幸福生活。我也更加坚定了这样的信念：非洲发展不可限量，非洲未来充满希望，中非友好合作前景广阔，中非全面战略合作伙伴关系发展大有可为！
Over a month ago, I paid my fourth visit to Africa as the Chinese President, which was also my ninth visit to this land of great promise. During the last visit, I once again saw an Africa that is beautiful and richly endowed, that is full of dynamism in development, and I learned about first-hand the African people's ardent hope for a better future. I concluded the visit even more convinced that Africa's development has great potential, that this great continent is full of hope, that China-Africa friendship and cooperation have broad vistas, and that China and Africa can forge an even stronger comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership!
“根之茂者其实遂，膏之沃者其光晔。”历史有其规律和逻辑。中非双方基于相似遭遇和共同使命，在过去的岁月里同心同向、守望相助，走出了一条特色鲜明的合作共赢之路。
As an ancient Chinese scholar once observed, "Only with deep roots can a tree yield rich fruit; only filled with oil can a lamp burn brightly." History follows its own rules and logic. With similar fate in the past and a common mission, China and Africa have extended sympathy to and helped each other throughout all the years. Together, we have embarked on a distinctive path of win-win cooperation.
在这条道路上，中国始终秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观，同非洲各国团结一心、同舟共济、携手前进。
Marching on this path, China has followed the principle of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith and the principle of pursuing the greater good and shared interests. China has stood with African countries. Together, we have worked in unity and forged ahead.
——中国在合作中坚持真诚友好、平等相待。13亿多中国人民始终同12亿多非洲人民同呼吸、共命运，始终尊重非洲、热爱非洲、支持非洲，坚持做到“五不”，即：不干预非洲国家探索符合国情的发展道路，不干涉非洲内政，不把自己的意志强加于人，不在对非援助中附加任何政治条件，不在对非投资融资中谋取政治私利。中国希望各国都能在处理非洲事务时做到这“五不”。中国永远是非洲的好朋友、好伙伴、好兄弟。任何人都不能破坏中非人民的大团结！
-- China values sincerity, friendship and equality in pursuing cooperation. The over 1.3 billion Chinese people have been with the over 1.2 billion African people in pursuing a shared future. We respect Africa, love Africa and support Africa. We follow a "five-no" approach in our relations with Africa: no interference in African countries' pursuit of development paths that fit their national conditions; no interference in African countries' internal affairs; no imposition of our will on African countries; no attachment of political strings to assistance to Africa; and no seeking of selfish political gains in investment and financing cooperation with Africa. We hope this "five-no" approach could apply to other countries as they deal with matters regarding Africa. For China, we are always Africa's good friend, good partner and good brother. No one could undermine the great unity between the Chinese people and the African people.
——中国在合作中坚持义利相兼、以义为先。中国相信中非合作的必由之路就是发挥各自优势，把中国发展同助力非洲发展紧密结合，实现合作共赢、共同发展。中国主张多予少取、先予后取、只予不取，张开怀抱欢迎非洲搭乘中国发展快车。任何人都不能阻挡中非人民振兴的步伐！
-- China pursues common interests and puts friendship first in pursuing cooperation. China believes that the sure way to boost China-Africa cooperation is for both sides to leverage its respective strength; it is for China to complement Africa's development through its own growth, and it is for both China and Africa to pursue win-win cooperation and common development. In doing so, China follows the principle of giving more and taking less, giving before taking and giving without asking for return. With open arms, we welcome African countries aboard the express train of China's development. No one could hold back the Chinese people or the African people as we march toward rejuvenation.
——中国在合作中坚持发展为民、务实高效。中国坚持把中非人民利益放在首位，为中非人民福祉而推进合作，让合作成果惠及中非人民。凡是答应非洲兄弟的事，就会尽心尽力办好。面对新形势新挑战，中国不断完善机制、创新理念、拓展领域，提高合作质量和水平，稳步迈向更高水平。中非合作好不好，只有中非人民最有发言权。任何人都不能以想象和臆测否定中非合作的显著成就！
-- China takes a people-oriented approach in pursuing practical cooperation with efficiency. With top priority given to the interests of Chinese and African peoples, China advances its cooperation with Africa to improve the well-being of Chinese and African peoples and deliver more benefits to them. We will fully honor the promises we have made to our African brothers. Faced with new developments and challenges, China will continue to improve institution building, develop new ideas and expand areas of cooperation with Africa to bring our cooperation to greater heights. Ultimately, it is for the peoples of China and Africa to judge the performance of China-Africa cooperation. No one could deny the remarkable achievements made in China-Africa cooperation, not with their assumption or imagination.
——中国在合作中坚持开放包容、兼收并蓄。中国始终认为，非洲实现长治久安、发展振兴，是非洲人民心愿，也是国际社会责任。中国愿同国际合作伙伴一道，支持非洲和平与发展。凡是对非洲有利的事情，我们都欢迎、都支持，全世界都应该尽力做、认真做。任何人都不能阻止和干扰国际社会支持非洲发展的积极行动！
-- China takes an open and inclusive approach to cooperation. China is fully aware that long-term stability, security, development and invigoration for Africa is not only the longing of the African people; it is also the responsibility of the international community. China stands ready to work with other international partners to support Africa in pursuing peace and development. China welcomes and supports all initiatives that meet Africa's interests, and believes that it should be the same with the wider international community. No one could stand in the way or obstruct international efforts to support Africa's development.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，全球治理体系和国际秩序变革加速推进，新兴市场国家和发展中国家快速崛起，国际力量对比更趋均衡，世界各国人民的命运从未像今天这样紧紧相连。
Our world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century: the surging trend toward multi-polarity, economic globalization, IT application and cultural diversity, accelerated transformation of the global governance system and international order, rapid rise of emerging markets and developing countries, and greater balance in global power configuration. The well-being of people in all countries has never been so closely intertwined as it is today.
同时，我们也面临前所未有的挑战。霸权主义、强权政治依然存在，保护主义、单边主义不断抬头，战乱恐袭、饥荒疫情此伏彼现，传统安全和非传统安全问题复杂交织。
On the other hand, we also face challenges unseen before. Hegemony and power politics persist; protectionism and unilateralism are mounting; war, conflicts, terrorism, famine and epidemics continue to plague us; security challenges, both traditional and non-traditional, remain as complex and interwoven as ever.
我们坚信，和平与发展是当今时代的主题，也是时代的命题，需要国际社会以团结、智慧、勇气，扛起历史责任，解答时代命题，展现时代担当。
However, we are firm in our conviction that peace and development remain the underlying trend of our times. Indeed, they are the call of the times. The international community should take our historical responsibility and respond to the call of our times with solidarity, vision, courage and a sense of mission.
——面对时代命题，中国把为人类作出新的更大贡献作为自己的使命。中国愿同世界各国携手构建人类命运共同体，发展全球伙伴关系，拓展友好合作，走出一条相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的国与国交往新路，让世界更加和平安宁，让人类生活更加幸福美好。
-- To respond to the call of the times, China takes it its mission to make new and even greater contribution to mankind. China will work with other countries to build a community with a shared future for mankind, forge partnerships across the world, enhance friendship and cooperation, and explore a new path of growing state-to-state relations based on mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation. Our goal is to make the world a place of peace and stability and life happier and more fulfilling for all.
——面对时代命题，中国愿同国际合作伙伴共建“一带一路”。我们要通过这个国际合作新平台，增添共同发展新动力，把“一带一路”建设成为和平之路、繁荣之路、开放之路、绿色之路、创新之路、文明之路。
-- To respond to the call of the times, China is ready to jointly promote the Belt and Road Initiative with international partners. We hope to create new drivers to power common development through this new platform of international cooperation; and we hope to turn it into a road of peace, prosperity, openness, green development and innovation and a road that brings together different civilizations.
——面对时代命题，中国将积极参与全球治理，秉持共商共建共享全球治理观。中国始终是世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者，支持扩大发展中国家在国际事务中的代表性和发言权，支持补强全球治理体系中的南方短板，支持汇聚南南合作的力量，推动全球治理体系更加平衡地反映大多数国家特别是发展中国家的意愿和利益。
-- To respond to the call of the times, China will get actively involved in global governance and stay committed to the vision of consultation, cooperation and benefit for all in global governance. China has all along played its part in promoting world peace and development and upholding the international order. We call for increasing the representation and voice of developing countries in international affairs and support efforts to strengthen the South, a weak link in the global governance system, as well as efforts to create synergy in South-South cooperation. We will continue the efforts to make the global governance system better represent the will and interests of the majority of countries, especially developing countries.
——面对时代命题，中国坚定不移坚持对外开放。面对世界经济增长的不稳定性不确定性，中国坚持走开放融通、合作共赢之路，坚定维护开放型世界经济和多边贸易体制，反对保护主义、单边主义，把自己囚于自我封闭的孤岛没有前途！
-- To respond to the call of the times, China will remain committed to opening-up. Facing uncertainty and unpredictability in global growth, China will continue to grow an open economy for win-win cooperation, and it will embrace an open world economy and the multilateral trading system and reject protectionism and unilateralism. No one who keeps himself in isolation on a single island will have a future.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
“海不辞水，故能成其大。”中国是世界上最大的发展中国家，非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆，中非早已结成休戚与共的命运共同体。我们愿同非洲人民心往一处想、劲往一处使，共筑更加紧密的中非命运共同体，为推动构建人类命运共同体树立典范。
To quote a Chinese saying, "The ocean is vast because it rejects no rivers." China, the world's largest developing country, and Africa, the continent with the largest number of developing countries, have long formed a community with a shared future. Indeed, we share a common stake. China will work with Africa to achieve our shared goal of building a closer China-Africa community with a shared future and turn it into a pacesetter for building such a community for mankind.
第一，携手打造责任共担的中非命运共同体。我们要扩大各层级政治对话和政策沟通，加强在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上的相互理解和支持，密切在重大国际和地区问题上的协作配合，维护中非和广大发展中国家共同利益。
First, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future to assume our joint responsibility. We could increase political and policy dialogue at various levels, enhance mutual understanding and support on issues involving each other's core interests and major concerns, and boost coordination on major international and regional issues. Such efforts will enable us to uphold the common interests of China and Africa as well as other developing countries.
第二，携手打造合作共赢的中非命运共同体。我们要抓住中非发展战略对接的机遇，用好共建“一带一路”带来的重大机遇，把“一带一路”建设同落实非洲联盟《2063年议程》、联合国2030年可持续发展议程以及非洲各国发展战略相互对接，开拓新的合作空间，发掘新的合作潜力，在传统优势领域深耕厚植，在新经济领域加快培育亮点。
Second, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that pursues win-win cooperation. We could both seize the opportunity created by the complementarity between our respective development strategies and the major opportunities presented by the Belt and Road Initiative. We need to see to it that the Belt and Road Initiative and the AU Agenda 2063, the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the development programs of African countries better complement each other. With these efforts, we could expand areas of cooperation, unlock new cooperation potential, consolidate our traditional areas of cooperation, and foster new highlights of cooperation in the new economy.
第三，携手打造幸福共享的中非命运共同体。我们要把增进民生福祉作为发展中非关系的出发点和落脚点。中非合作要给中非人民带来看得见、摸得着的成果和实惠。长期以来，中非一直互帮互助、同舟共济，中国将为非洲减贫发展、就业创收、安居乐业作出新的更大的努力。
Third, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that delivers happiness for all of us. Making lives better for our people is what we aim to achieve in growing China-Africa relations; so we need to make sure our cooperation delivers real benefits to us both in China and in Africa. Mutual help and solidarity is what has defined China-Africa relations over the years. Going forward, China will do more to help Africa alleviate poverty, pursue development, increase employment and income, and better the lives of its people.
第四，携手打造文化共兴的中非命运共同体。我们都为中非各自灿烂的文明而自豪，也愿为世界文明多样化作出更大贡献。我们要促进中非文明交流互鉴、交融共存，为彼此文明复兴、文化进步、文艺繁荣提供持久助力，为中非合作提供更深厚的精神滋养。我们要扩大文化艺术、教育体育、智库媒体、妇女青年等各界人员交往，拉紧中非人民的情感纽带。
Fourth, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that enjoys cultural prosperity. Both China and Africa are proud of our splendid civilizations, and we are both ready to make greater contributions to promoting cultural diversity in the world. By enhancing exchanges, mutual learning and harmonious co-existence of our civilizations, we will inject lasting impetus into invigorating our civilizations and cultures, enriching our artistic creations, and provide rich cultural nourishment for China-Africa cooperation. With more people-to-people exchanges in culture and art, education, sports, and between our think tanks, the media, and women and young people, we will strengthen the bond between the people of China and Africa.
第五，携手打造安全共筑的中非命运共同体。历经磨难，方知和平可贵。中国主张共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观，坚定支持非洲国家和非洲联盟等地区组织以非洲方式解决非洲问题，支持非洲落实“消弭枪声的非洲”倡议。中国愿为促进非洲和平稳定发挥建设性作用，支持非洲国家提升自主维稳维和能力。
Fifth, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that enjoys common security. People that have gone through adversity value peace most. China champions a new vision of security featuring common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We firmly support African countries and the African Union as well as other regional organizations in Africa in solving African issues in the African way, and we support the African initiative of "Silence the Guns in Africa". China is ready to play a constructive role in promoting peace and stability in Africa and will support African countries to strengthen their independent capacity for safeguarding stability and peace.
第六，携手打造和谐共生的中非命运共同体。地球是人类唯一的家园。中国愿同非洲一道，倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的发展方式，共同保护青山绿水和万物生灵。中国愿同非洲加强在应对气候变化、应用清洁能源、防控荒漠化和水土流失、保护野生动植物等生态环保领域交流合作，让中国和非洲都成为人与自然和睦相处的美好家园。
Sixth, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that promotes harmony between man and nature. The Earth is the only place which we mankind call home. China will work with Africa to pursue green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable development and protect our lush mountains and lucid waters and all living beings on our planet. We will strengthen exchange and cooperation with Africa on climate change, clean energy, prevention and control of desertification and soil erosion, protection of wildlife and other areas of ecological and environmental preservation. Together, we could make China and Africa beautiful places for people to live in harmony with nature.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
2015年中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会以来，中国全面落实约翰内斯堡峰会上确定的中非“十大合作计划”：一大批铁路、公路、机场、港口等基础设施以及经贸合作区陆续建成或在建设之中，中非和平安全、科教文卫、减贫惠民、民间交往等合作深入推进，中国承诺提供的600亿美元资金支持都已兑现或作出安排。“十大合作计划”给中非人民带来丰硕成果，展现了中非共同的创造力、凝聚力、行动力，将中非全面战略合作伙伴关系成功推向新的高度。
Since the 2015 FOCAC Johannesburg Summit, China has fully implemented the ten cooperation plans adopted at the Summit. A large number of railway, highway, airport, port and other infrastructure projects as well as a number of economic and trade cooperation zones have been built or are under construction. Our cooperation on peace and security, science, education, culture, health, poverty reduction, and people-to-people interactions has deepened. The US$60 billion financing pledged by China has been either delivered or arranged. These ten cooperation plans have brought huge benefits to the African and Chinese peoples. They have fully demonstrated the creativity, rallying power and efficiency of China-Africa cooperation, and lifted China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership to new heights.
中国愿以打造新时代更加紧密的中非命运共同体为指引，在推进中非“十大合作计划”基础上，同非洲国家密切配合，未来3年和今后一段时间重点实施“八大行动”：
To build an even closer China-Africa community with a shared future in the new era, China will, on the basis of the ten cooperation plans already adopted, launch eight major initiatives in close collaboration with African countries in the next three years and beyond.
一是实施产业促进行动。中国决定在华设立中国－非洲经贸博览会；鼓励中国企业扩大对非投资，在非洲新建和升级一批经贸合作区；支持非洲在2030年前基本实现粮食安全，同非洲一道制定并实施中非农业现代化合作规划和行动计划，实施50个农业援助项目，向非洲受灾国家提供10亿元人民币紧急人道主义粮食援助，向非洲派遣500名高级农业专家，培养青年农业科研领军人才和农民致富带头人；支持成立中国在非企业社会责任联盟；继续加强和非洲国家本币结算合作，发挥中非发展基金、中非产能合作基金、非洲中小企业发展专项贷款作用。
First, China will launch an industrial promotion initiative. We have decided to open a China-Africa economic and trade expo in China; we encourage Chinese companies to increase investment in Africa, and will build and upgrade a number of economic and trade cooperation zones in Africa. We will support Africa in achieving general food security by 2030, work with Africa to formulate and implement a program of action to promote China-Africa cooperation on agricultural modernization. We will implement 50 agricultural assistance programs, provide RMB 1 billion of emergency humanitarian food assistance to African countries affected by natural disasters, send 500 senior agriculture experts to Africa, and train young researchers in agri-science and entrepreneurs in agri-business. We will support Chinese companies in Africa to forge alliance of corporate social responsibilities. We will continue to strengthen cooperation with African countries in local currency settlement and make good use of the China-Africa Development Fund, the China-Africa Fund for Industrial Cooperation and the Special Loan for the Development of African SMEs.
二是实施设施联通行动。中国决定和非洲联盟启动编制《中非基础设施合作规划》；支持中国企业以投建营一体化等模式参与非洲基础设施建设，重点加强能源、交通、信息通信、跨境水资源等合作，同非方一道实施一批互联互通重点项目；支持非洲单一航空运输市场建设，开通更多中非直航航班；为非洲国家及其金融机构来华发行债券提供便利；在遵循多边规则和程序的前提下，支持非洲国家更好利用亚洲基础设施投资银行、新开发银行、丝路基金等资源。
Second, China will launch an infrastructure connectivity initiative. We have decided to jointly formulate a China-Africa infrastructure cooperation plan with the African Union. We will support Chinese companies in participating in Africa's infrastructure development by way of investment-construction-operation or through other models, with focus on enhancing cooperation on energy, transport, information, telecommunications and cross-border water resources. We will work with Africa to undertake a number of key connectivity projects. We will support Africa in developing the Single African Air Transport Market and open more direct flights between China and Africa. We will facilitate bond issuance by African countries and their financial institutions in China. On the basis of following multilateral rules and procedures, we will support African countries in making better use of financing resources of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the New Development Bank, and the Silk Road Fund.
三是实施贸易便利行动。中国决定扩大进口非洲商品特别是非资源类产品，支持非洲国家参加中国国际进口博览会，免除非洲最不发达国家参展费用；继续加强市场监管及海关方面交流合作，为非洲实施50个贸易畅通项目；定期举办中非品牌面对面活动；支持非洲大陆自由贸易区建设，继续同非洲有意愿的国家和地区开展自由贸易谈判；推动中非电子商务合作，建立电子商务合作机制。
Third, China will launch a trade facilitation initiative. We have decided to increase imports, particularly non-resource products, from Africa. We support African countries in participating in the China International Import Expo. The least developed African countries participating in it will be exempted from paying exhibition stand fees. We will continue to strengthen exchanges and cooperation on market regulation and between customs authorities, and implement 50 trade facilitation programs for Africa. We will hold, on a regular basis, marketing activities for Chinese and African brand products. We support the building of the African Continental Free Trade Area and will continue to hold free trade negotiations with interested African countries and regions. And we will set up relevant mechanisms to promote e-commerce cooperation with Africa.
四是实施绿色发展行动。中国决定为非洲实施50个绿色发展和生态环保援助项目，重点加强在应对气候变化、海洋合作、荒漠化防治、野生动物和植物保护等方面的交流合作；推进中非环境合作中心建设，加强环境政策交流对话和环境问题联合研究；开展中非绿色使者计划，在环保管理、污染防治、绿色经济等领域为非洲培养专业人才；建设中非竹子中心，帮助非洲开发竹藤产业；开展环境保护宣传教育合作。
Fourth, we will launch a green development initiative. We have decided to undertake 50 projects for green development and ecological and environmental protection in Africa to expand exchanges and cooperation with Africa on climate change, ocean, desertification prevention and control, and wildlife protection. A China-Africa environmental cooperation center will be set up, and more policy dialogue and joint research on environmental issues will be conducted. The China-Africa Green Envoys Program will be implemented to strengthen Africa's human capacity for environmental management, pollution prevention and control, and green development. A China-Africa bamboo center will be established to help Africa make bamboo and rattan products. China will also work with Africa to raise public awareness of environmental protection.
五是实施能力建设行动。中国决定同非洲加强发展经验交流，支持开展经济社会发展规划方面合作；在非洲设立10个鲁班工坊，向非洲青年提供职业技能培训；支持设立旨在推动青年创新创业合作的中非创新合作中心；实施头雁计划，为非洲培训1000名精英人才；为非洲提供5万个中国政府奖学金名额，为非洲提供5万个研修培训名额，邀请2000名非洲青年来华交流。
Fifth, we will launch a capacity building initiative. China will share more of its development practices with Africa and support cooperation with Africa on economic and social development planning. Ten Luban Workshops will be set up in Africa to provide vocational training for young Africans. China will support opening of a China-Africa innovation cooperation center to promote youth innovation and entrepreneurship. A tailor-made program will be carried out to train 1,000 high-caliber Africans. China will provide Africa with 50,000 government scholarships and 50,000 training opportunities for seminars and workshops, and will invite 2,000 young Africans to visit China for exchanges.
六是实施健康卫生行动。中国决定优化升级50个医疗卫生援非项目，重点援建非洲疾控中心总部、中非友好医院等旗舰项目；开展公共卫生交流和信息合作，实施中非新发再发传染病、血吸虫、艾滋病、疟疾等疾控合作项目；为非洲培养更多专科医生，继续派遣并优化援非医疗队；开展“光明行”、“爱心行”、“微笑行”等医疗巡诊活动；实施面向弱势群体的妇幼心连心工程。
Sixth, we will launch a health care initiative. China has decided to upgrade 50 medical and health aid programs for Africa, particularly flagship projects such as the headquarters of the African Center for Disease Control and Prevention and China-Africa Friendship Hospitals. Exchange and information cooperation will be carried out on public health. Cooperation programs will be launched on the prevention and control of emerging and re-emerging communicable diseases, schistosomiasis, HIV/AIDS and malaria. China will train more medical specialists for Africa and continue to send medical teams that better meet Africa's needs. More mobile medical services will be provided to patients for the treatment of cataract, heart disease and dental defects. And targeted health care services will be provided to women and children of vulnerable groups in Africa.
七是实施人文交流行动。中国决定设立中国非洲研究院，同非方深化文明互鉴；打造中非联合研究交流计划增强版；实施50个文体旅游项目，支持非洲国家加入丝绸之路国际剧院、博物馆、艺术节等联盟；打造中非媒体合作网络；继续推动中非互设文化中心；支持非洲符合条件的教育机构申办孔子学院；支持更多非洲国家成为中国公民组团出境旅游目的地。
Seventh, we will launch a people-to-people exchange initiative. China decided to establish an institute of African studies to enhance exchanges with Africa on civilization. The China-Africa Joint Research and Exchange Plan will be upgraded. Fifty joint cultural, sports and tourism events will be organized. China welcomes Africa's participation in the Silk Road International League of Theaters, the Silk Road International Museum Alliance and the Network of Silk Road Art Festivals. A China-Africa media cooperation network will be established. More African culture centers will be opened in China and more Chinese culture centers in Africa. Qualified African educational institutes are welcome to host Confucius Institutes. More African countries are welcome to become destinations for Chinese tour groups.
八是实施和平安全行动。中国决定设立中非和平安全合作基金，支持中非开展和平安全和维和维稳合作，继续向非洲联盟提供无偿军事援助。支持萨赫勒、亚丁湾、几内亚湾等地区国家维护地区安全和反恐努力；设立中非和平安全论坛，为中非在和平安全领域加强交流提供平台；在共建“一带一路”、社会治安、联合国维和、打击海盗、反恐等领域推动实施50个安全援助项目。
Eighth, we will launch a peace and security initiative. China decided to set up a China-Africa peace and security fund to boost our cooperation on peace, security, peacekeeping, and law and order. China will continue to provide military aid to the AU, and will support countries in the Sahel region and those bordering the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of Guinea in upholding security and combating terrorism in their regions. A China-Africa peace and security forum will be established as a platform for conducting more exchanges in this area. Fifty security assistance programs will be launched to advance China-Africa cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative, and in areas of law and order, UN peacekeeping missions, fighting piracy and combating terrorism.
为推动“八大行动”顺利实施，中国愿以政府援助、金融机构和企业投融资等方式，向非洲提供600亿美元支持，其中包括：提供150亿美元的无偿援助、无息贷款和优惠贷款；提供200亿美元的信贷资金额度；支持设立100亿美元的中非开发性金融专项资金和50亿美元的自非洲进口贸易融资专项资金；推动中国企业未来3年对非洲投资不少于100亿美元。同时，免除与中国有外交关系的非洲最不发达国家、重债穷国、内陆发展中国家、小岛屿发展中国家截至2018年底到期未偿还政府间无息贷款债务。
To make sure that these eight initiatives are implemented on the ground, China will extend US$60 billion of financing to Africa in the form of government assistance as well as investment and financing by financial institutions and companies. This will include US$15 billion of grants, interest-free loans and concessional loans, US$20 billion of credit lines, the setting up of a US$10 billion special fund for development financing and a US$5 billion special fund for financing imports from Africa. We encourage Chinese companies to make at least US$10 billion of investment in Africa in the next three years. In addition, for those of Africa's least developed countries, heavily indebted and poor countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing countries that have diplomatic relations with China, the debt they have incurred in the form of interest-free Chinese government loans due to mature by the end of 2018 will be exempted.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
青年是中非关系的希望所在。我提出的中非“八大行动”倡议中，许多措施都着眼青年、培养青年、扶助青年，致力于为他们提供更多就业机会、更好发展空间。去年10月，我同南南合作与发展学院的留华学生互致书信，他们中绝大多数来自非洲。我在信中勉励他们坚持学以致用，行远升高，积厚成器，为推动中非合作和南南合作谱写新篇章。
The future of China-Africa relations lies in our young people. Many of the measures in the eight initiatives I just outlined are designed to help young people in Africa. These measures will provide young Africans with more training and job opportunities and open up more space for their development. Last October, I wrote back to the exchange students of the Institute of South-South Cooperation and Development. Most of them were from Africa. I encouraged them to make the best of what they have learned, aim high, and keep working hard to promote China-Africa cooperation and South-South cooperation. I believe they have new roles to play and new accomplishments to make in this regard.
“红日初升，其道大光。”我相信，只要中非友好的接力棒能够在青年一代手中不断相传，中非命运共同体就一定会更具生机活力，中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦和非洲人民团结振兴的非洲梦就一定能够早日实现！
"The red rising sun will light up the road ahead." I am confident that the baton of China-Africa friendship will be passed from one generation to the next and that China and Africa, working together, will build an even more vibrant community with a shared future. The day will surely come when the Chinese nation realizes its dream of national renewal and Africa realizes its dream of unity and invigoration!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.