115. 习近平在金砖国家领导人第七次会晤上的讲话
共建伙伴关系 共创美好未来
——在金砖国家领导人第七次会晤上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年7月9日，乌法）
Building Partnership Together Toward a Bright Future
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Seventh BRICS Summit
Ufa, 9 July 2015
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的祖马总统，
尊敬的罗塞夫总统，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
President Putin,
Prime Minister Modi,
President Zuma,
President Rousseff,
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
很高兴在美丽的乌法同大家再次会晤。感谢普京总统和俄罗斯政府所做的周到安排。	
It gives me great pleasure to meet all of you again in the beautiful city of Ufa. I wish to thank President Putin and the Russian government for the thoughtful arrangement.
这次乌法会晤是金砖国家领导人会晤时隔6年再次来到俄罗斯，对金砖国家合作进程具有重要意义。6年来，金砖国家合作走过了一段不平凡的历程。	
The Ufa Summit has brought BRICS leaders back to Russia after six years, which, in my view, is of great significance to the BRICS process. The past six years has indeed witnessed a momentous journey for BRICS cooperation.
——我们秉持国际公平正义，推动国际关系民主化，在许多重大国际和地区问题上，站在新兴市场国家和发展中国家的立场共同发声，呼吁遵守联合国宪章宗旨和原则以及国际法和国际关系基本准则，通过政治和外交手段和平解决国际争端。	
-- We have stood for international equity, justice and greater democracy in international relations, spoken with one voice for the emerging markets and developing countries on many major international and regional issues, called for full compliance with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, the international law and basic norms of international relations, and pushed for peaceful settlement of international disputes through political and diplomatic means.
——我们推动世界经济增长，完善全球经济治理，加强新兴市场国家和发展中国家在国际经济金融事务中的代表性和话语权，让世界银行、国际货币基金组织等传统国际金融机构取得新进展，焕发新活力。	
-- We have worked to promote world economic growth, improve global economic governance, and enhance the representation and voice of the emerging markets and developing countries in international economic and financial affairs, and provided new momentum and drive to the World Bank, IMF and other traditional international financial institutions.
——我们拓展合作领域，从无到有，从小到大，涵盖政治、经济、金融、贸易、社会、人文等多个领域，形成多层次、全方位合作架构。金砖国家新开发银行筹建工作全面展开，应急储备安排正式启动，充分证明了金砖国家合作的有效性和行动力。	
-- We have expanded the scope of our cooperation step by step, and put in place a multi-layered and all-dimensional structure of cooperation, covering political, economic, financial, trade, social, cultural and people-to-people exchanges. We have kicked off the preparations for the New Development Bank and launched the Contingent Reserve Arrangement, which testifies to the effectiveness and capability of BRICS cooperation.
当前，世界经济仍然处于国际金融危机后的深度调整期，不稳定不确定因素增多。新兴市场国家和发展中国家风险和挑战不断集聚，经济增速普遍放缓，金砖国家各国发展也面临不少困难和挑战。	
At present, the world economy is still undergoing deep adjustment in the wake of the international financial crisis, and factors of instability and uncertainty are on the increase. To the emerging markets and developing world in general, risks and challenges continue to mount and economic growth has slowed down. The BRICS members, in particular, are faced with multiple difficulties and challenges.
越是在困难的时候，越要坚定信心。应该看到，任何进步都不是直线的，有曲折也有反复。尽管会有这样那样的困难，但金砖国家拥有丰富自然和人力资源、广阔国内市场、巨大发展潜力、充裕政策空间，上升趋势不会改变。	
The harder the times, the more valuable our confidence is. We must understand that progress can never be a straight line, and it is likely to go zig-zag and even suffer setbacks. The BRICS countries are blessed with plentiful natural and human resources, and enjoy such strengths as vast domestic markets, huge development potential and ample policy space. Even though there are difficulties along the way, the rise of the BRICS is irreversible.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
当前，国际形势错综复杂，金砖国家机遇和挑战并存，我们应该加强合作、携手并进，继续做推动全球发展的领跑者。去年在巴西福塔莱萨，我们一致决定本着开放、包容、合作、共赢精神，深化金砖国家伙伴关系。今年的东道国俄罗斯也将“金砖国家伙伴关系”作为会晤主题，说明这一理念已经深入人心。	
The current international situation remains intricate and complex, with opportunities and challenges juxtaposed for the BRICS countries. We must enhance our cooperation, strengthen our unity, and continue to display leadership in promoting global growth. In Fortaleza last year, we made the decision to deepen BRICS partnership in the spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation. This year, our host Russia has also made BRICS partnership the theme of the summit. This shows that partnership as a notion has struck deep roots in our hearts.
下面，我愿就加强金砖国家伙伴关系谈几点看法。	
Now, let me share with you some of my observations on how to strengthen that partnership.
第一，构建维护世界和平的伙伴关系。当前，和平发展的时代潮流更加强劲，但世界仍然很不太平，局部动荡此起彼伏，恐怖主义、毒品威胁、重大疫情、自然灾害等非传统安全挑战层出不穷。金砖国家应该倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，协调行动，相互支援，携手应对这些全球性问题。我们要共同防范和打击一切形式的恐怖主义，在反恐经验交流、情报分享、线索核查、执法合作等领域开展合作。中方支持加快金砖国家禁毒合作机制化进程，将同其他成员国携手推动解决地区和全球毒品问题。	
First, we need to build a partnership for world peace. Despite the growing trend of our times for peace and development, the world is far from being tranquil. Local volatilities keep cropping up, and such non-traditional security threats as terrorism, narcotics, major epidemic diseases and natural disasters continue to emerge. The BRICS countries should champion a new approach of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, take coordinated actions, come to each other's support, and work in concert to address such global challenges. We should guard against and combat all forms of terrorism, while cooperating in the sharing of experience and intelligence against terrorism, verification of criminal leads and law enforcement. China supports accelerating the building of the institutional framework for anti-narcotics cooperation, and is ready to join other member states in resolving the issue of narcotic drugs at both regional and global levels.
忘记历史就意味着背叛。今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利暨联合国成立70周年。金砖国家应该同世界上所有热爱和平的国家和人民一道，坚决反对否认、歪曲、篡改第二次世界大战历史的图谋和行径，共同维护第二次世界大战胜利成果和国际公平正义。同时，要以史为鉴，摒弃冷战思维，拒绝零和博弈，共同维护地区和世界和平稳定。	
Forgetting history is tantamount to betrayal. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the world war against fascism and the founding of the United Nations. The BRICS countries should join all the peace-loving countries and peoples in the world in firmly opposing any attempt or action to deny, distort or even tamper with the history of that war, and in upholding its victorious outcome and international equity and justice. At the same time, we must learn the lessons of history, do away with the Cold War mentality and reject the zero-sum game, and work together to maintain peace and stability in various regions and across the world.
我们要继续致力于推动国际关系民主化。在国际关系中动辄制裁或以制裁相威胁，无助于解决问题。要倡导通过对话和谈判，以和平和政治方式解决分歧。	
We should stay committed to promoting democracy in international relations. The use or threat of sanctions in international relations at every turn will not help solve problems. Dialogue and negotiation should play a useful part in settling differences peacefully and politically.
第二，构建促进共同发展的伙伴关系。金砖国家合作事业要繁荣昌盛，就要强本固基，打造金砖国家利益共同体。我们要以建设利益共享的价值链和利益融合的大市场为目标，共同构建更紧密经济伙伴关系，发挥各成员国在资源禀赋、产业结构上的互补优势，合力拓展更大发展空间。要同步推进金砖国家新开发银行总部和非洲区域中心建设，争取尽早投入运作，取得早期收获。落实好金砖国家经济伙伴战略，发掘新的合作亮点。	
Second, we need to build a partnership for common development.The continued success of BRICS cooperation hinges on laying a solid foundation, a community of shared interests among the BRICS countries. For the purpose of building a value chain of shared benefits and a big market of integrated interests, we should build an even closer economic partnership, leverage our complementary strengths in resource endowment and industrial structure and expand our development horizons through collective efforts. We should strive for simultaneous progress in building the New Development Bank headquarters and its African regional center, so that they will become operational sooner and produce early harvest. The BRICS economic partnership strategy needs to be implemented effectively with a view to identifying new areas of cooperation.
我们要继续致力于促进发展中国家共同发展繁荣。今年是国际发展年和气候变化年，金砖国家应该加强协调和配合，在2015年后发展议程、气候变化等重大国际发展议题上，维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益，引导2015年后发展议程谈判重点关注解决发展中国家特别是非洲国家和最不发达国家面临的困难和挑战。	
We need to stay committed to promoting common development and common prosperity of all developing nations. International development and climate change are among the top priorities of this year. The BRICS countries ought to step up their coordination and cooperation by upholding the common interest of emerging markets and developing countries on such major issues as the post-2015 development agenda and climate change, and by focusing on the difficulties and challenges of developing countries, African countries and the least developed countries in particular.
第三，构建弘扬多元文明的伙伴关系。金砖国家合作的成功充分证明，不同社会制度可以相互包容，不同发展模式可以相互合作，不同价值文化可以相互交流。我们要坚持开放包容，在交流互鉴中取长补短，在求同存异中共同前进。	
Third, we need to build a partnership for inter-civilization dialogue. The successful cooperation of the BRICS countries proves that different social systems can accommodate each other, that different development models can work with each other and that different values can draw on the strength of each other. We should stay open and inclusive so as to learn from each other and make progress together through seeking common ground while putting aside differences.
金砖国家分处四大洲、地跨南北半球，具有独特地理优势，我们要利用好这一优势，积极开展同其他国家和国际组织对话和交流，分享合作成果。要加强同其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家团结合作，不断壮大我们的力量，扩大金砖国家代表性和影响力。	
Located in four continents and two hemispheres, the BRICS countries have unique geographical advantages. We should make good use of such advantages by actively conducting dialogues and exchanges and sharing the achievements of cooperation with other countries and international organizations. We will build up our ranks and boost our representation and influence if we can enhance our solidarity and cooperation with other emerging markets and developing countries.
第四，构建加强全球经济治理的伙伴关系。国际经济规则需要不断革故鼎新，以适应全球增长格局新变化，让责任和能力相匹配。我们要共同致力于提高金砖国家在全球治理体系中的地位和作用，推动国际经济秩序顺应新兴市场国家和发展中国家力量上升的历史趋势。推动改革国际货币基金组织治理结构，增加新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权。倡导建设开放型世界经济，支持多边贸易体制，推动多哈回合谈判维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家的正当权益，确保各国在国际经贸活动中机会平等、规则平等、权利平等。
Fourth, we need to build a partnership for more effective global economic governance. International economic rules need constant updating in order to reflect changes in global growth pattern and ensure that a country's responsibilities are commensurate with its capabilities. We need to work together to enhance the stature and role of the BRICS countries in the global governance system, and help shape the international economic order in such a way that conforms to the historical trend of rising emerging markets and developing countries. We should promote reform to the governance structure of the IMF and increase the representation and voice of the emerging markets and developing countries. We should champion an open global economy, support the multilateral trading regime, take the Doha Round negotiations forward in a way that upholds the legitimate rights and interests of the emerging markets and developing countries, and ensure countries equal access to opportunities, rules and rights in international economic and trade activities.
金砖国家要加强在信息安全和互联网管理方面合作，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间，争取平等参与互联网治理权利。移民问题同金砖各国经济发展和社会稳定密切相关，我们也应该加强这一领域交流合作。	
The BRICS countries need to strengthen cooperation in information security and Internet management, jointly foster a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cyberspace, and strive for equal rights to participate in Internet governance. We should also enhance our exchanges and cooperation on migration, an issue that is closely related to economic development and social stability of the BRICS countries.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
正如我刚才提到的，我们各自国家发展都面临新的机遇和挑战。金砖国家发展阶段相似，所面临的机遇和挑战也有一定相通之处。我们应该加强治国理政经验交流，增进彼此了解，加强学习借鉴，共同探索解决问题的办法。	
As I said earlier, all our countries have before them new opportunities and challenges in their respective national development. With similar stages of development, the BRICS countries may share somewhat similar features in their opportunities and challenges. It is, therefore, necessary for us to compare notes in our respective governance, increase mutual understanding and mutual learning, and work together in search of solutions.
当前，中国正在协调推进全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党，规划了在新形势下治国理政的战略目标和战略举措。	
As for China, we are now making coordinated and comprehensive efforts to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, deepen reform, advance the rule of law and strictly enforce party discipline. We have laid out strategic goals and strategic steps for China's governance under new conditions.
全面建成小康社会是我们现阶段战略目标，也是实现中华民族伟大复兴中国梦关键一步。我们将继续坚持以经济建设为中心，致力于建设改革发展成果真正惠及人民，经济、政治、文化、社会、生态文明全面发展的小康社会。我们将坚定不移深化改革，推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化，推动经济社会持续健康发展。我们将坚持依法治国、依法执政、依法行政共同推进，坚持法治国家、法治政府、法治社会一体建设，实现科学立法、严格执法、公正司法、全民守法。我们将全面推进中国共产党自身建设，提高党的自我完善、自我革新、自我提高能力，保持对腐败零容忍的高压态势，完善体制机制建设，不断增强执政能力。	
To finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects is our strategic goal of the present stage. It is also a critical step toward realizing the Chinese dream of great national renewal. We will continue to take economic development as our central task and stay committed to building in China an economically, politically, culturally, socially and ecologically advanced society, delivering tangible benefit of reform and development to the people. We will firmly deepen reform, modernizing our governance system and governance capabilities and promoting sustained and sound economic and social progress. We will promote the rule of law, exercise governance and administration in accordance with law, build a law-based country, law-based government and law-based society, and ensure legislation in a scientific way, strict law enforcement, impartial justice, and observance of law by all. We will comprehensively advance the building of the Communist Party of China itself, enhance the Party's capability for self-improvement, self-innovation and self-development, maintain zero-tolerance for corruption, step up institutional building, and constantly strengthen its governing capacity.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
我们今天的努力，关系30亿金砖国家人民的福祉，也关系整个世界和全人类的前途和未来。俄罗斯有句谚语：“通向成功的道路永远都是曲折坎坷的。”让我们踏上征程，携手建设金砖国家更紧密的伙伴关系，共同开创金砖国家更美好未来！	
What we do today bears on the well-being of the three billion people in the BRICS countries as well as on the destiny and future of the whole world and the entire mankind. As a Russian proverb goes, "The road to success is always bumpy and tortuous." So let us embark on this journey together, work hand in hand to build a closer partnership among the BRICS countries and create an even better future for us all.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.