63. 习近平在金砖国家工商论坛开幕式上的讲话
深化金砖伙伴关系 开辟更加光明未来
Stronger BRICS Partnership for a Brighter Future
　　　　——在金砖国家领导人厦门会晤大范围会议上的讲话
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Xiamen Summit
2017年9月4日，厦门
Xiamen, 4 September 2017
尊敬的祖马总统
尊敬的特梅尔总统，
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
女士们、先生们、朋友们：
Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,
Your Excellency President Michel Temer,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
很高兴同各位同事再次相聚。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，对大家出席金砖国家领导人厦门会晤表示热烈的欢迎。我期待着同各位同事一道，围绕“深化金砖伙伴关系，开辟更加光明未来”的会晤主题，回顾总结金砖合作，勾画未来发展蓝图，开启合作新航程。
I am delighted to meet with my colleagues again. I wish to begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people, a warm welcome to you all. Welcome to the BRICS Xiamen Summit. With the focus on the theme of the summit: “Stronger Partnership for a Brighter Future”, I look forward to working with you to take stock of BRICS cooperation, map out a blueprint for its future development and set sail on a new journey of cooperation.
金砖合作已经走过10年光辉历程，我们五国虽然山海相隔，但怀着合作共赢的共同目标走到了一起。
BRICS cooperation has traversed a glorious journey of one decade. Though separated by mountains and oceans, our five countries have been closely bound by a shared commitment to win-win cooperation.
中国古人说：“交得其道，千里同好，固于胶漆，坚于金石。”金砖合作之所以得到快速发展，关键在于找准了合作之道。这就是互尊互助，携手走适合本国国情的发展道路；秉持开放包容、合作共赢的精神，持之以恒推进经济、政治、人文合作；倡导国际公平正义，同其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家和衷共济，共同营造良好外部环境。
As an ancient Chinese saying goes, “A partnership forged with the right approach defies geographical distance; it is thicker than glue and stronger than metal and stone.” We owe the rapid development of BRICS cooperation to our adoption of a right approach. Guided by this approach, we have respected and supported each other in following the path of development suited to our respective national conditions; we have pushed forward economic, political and people-to-people cooperation in an open, inclusive and win-win spirit; and we have worked in unison with other emerging market and developing countries to uphold international justice and equity and foster a sound external environment.
事实证明，金砖合作契合我们五国发展共同需要，顺应历史大势。尽管我们五国国情不同，但我们对伙伴关系、繁荣发展的追求是共同的，这使我们能够超越差异和分歧，努力实现互利共赢。
Past progress shows that BRICS cooperation has met our common need for development and is in keeping with the trend of history. Though we have different national conditions, we share the commitment to pursuing development and prosperity through partnership. This has enabled us to rise above differences and seek win-win results.
当前，世界格局发生了许多深刻复杂变化。在这一背景下，金砖合作显得更加重要。五国人民希望我们携手促进发展，提高人民福祉。国际社会期待我们维护世界和平，推动共同发展。我们应该再接再厉，全面深化金砖伙伴关系，开启金砖合作第二个“金色十年”。
As the world undergoes profound and complex changes, BRICS cooperation has become more important. Our people expect us to jointly boost development and improve their well-being. The international community expects us to make contribution to world peace and common development. We must redouble our efforts to comprehensively deepen BRICS partnership and usher in the second “Golden Decade” of BRICS cooperation.
第一，致力于推进经济务实合作。务实合作是金砖合作的根基，在这方面我们成绩斐然。同时，我们也要看到，现在，金砖合作潜力还没有充分释放出来。据统计，2016年金砖国家对外投资1970亿美元，只有5.7%发生在我们五国之间。这说明，我们五国还有广阔合作空间。
First, we need to seek practical results in our economic cooperation. Results-oriented cooperation is the foundation of BRICS cooperation, and significant progress has been made in this regard. However, we have yet to fully tap the potential of BRICS cooperation. Statistics show that of the 197 billion US dollars outbound investment we made in 2016, only 5.7% took place among our five countries. This means BRICS cooperation still has broad space.
我们应该紧紧围绕经济务实合作这条主线，在贸易投资、货币金融、互联互通、可持续发展、创新和产业合作等领域拓展利益汇聚点。今年，我们制定了《金砖国家服务贸易合作路线图》、《金砖国家投资便利化纲要》、《金砖国家电子商务合作倡议》、《金砖国家创新合作行动计划》、《金砖国家深化工业领域合作行动计划》，成立了新开发银行非洲区域中心，决定建立金砖国家示范电子口岸网络，在税收、电子商务、本币债券、政府和社会资本合作、金融机构和服务网络化布局等方面达成积极共识，各领域务实合作不断机制化、实心化，含金量不断提升。
We need to stay focused on promoting results-oriented economic cooperation, and expand converging interests in trade and investment, currency and finance, connectivity, sustainable development, innovation and industrial cooperation. This year, we have formulated the BRICS Trade in Services Cooperation Roadmap, the Outlines for BRICS Investment Facilitation, the BRICS E-Commerce Cooperation Initiative, the BRICS Action Plan for Innovation Cooperation and the Action Plan for Deepening Industrial Cooperation Among BRICS Countries. We have launched the African Regional Center of the New Development Bank (NDB), decided to set up the BRICS Model E-Port Network and reached extensive agreement on taxation, e-commerce, local currency bond, public-private partnership, and the network of financial institutions and services. Our practical cooperation has become more institutionalized and substantive, and delivered more tangible results.
我愿借此机会宣布，中方将设立首期5亿元人民币金砖国家经济技术合作交流计划，用于加强经贸等领域政策交流和务实合作。向新开发银行项目准备基金出资400万美元，支持银行业务运营和长远发展。我们愿同各方一道努力，把以往成果和共识落实好，让现有机制运行好，共同把握新工业革命带来的历史机遇，积极探索务实合作新领域新方式，拉紧联系纽带，让金砖合作机制行稳致远。
I wish to announce here that China will launch the Economic and Technical Cooperation Plan for BRICS Countries with 500 million yuan for the first term to facilitate policy exchange and practical cooperation in the economic and trade fields. China will contribute four million US dollars to the NDB Project Preparation Facility to support the business operation and long-term development of the bank. China will work with all parties to follow through on the outcomes and consensus achieved in the past, and make good use of existing mechanisms. Together, we must seize the historic opportunities of the new industrial revolution, explore new areas and models of practical cooperation, and enhance our links to ensure sustained and steady progress of the BRICS cooperation mechanism.
第二，致力于加强发展战略对接。我们五国虽然国情不同，但处在相近发展阶段，具有相同发展目标，都已进入经济爬坡过坎的时期。加强发展战略对接，发挥各自在资源、市场、劳动力等方面比较优势，将激发我们五国增长潜力和30亿人民创造力，开辟出巨大发展空间。
Second, we need to strengthen the complementarity of our development strategies. Despite our differences in national conditions, our five countries are in a similar stage of development and share the same development goals. We all face an arduous task in growing the economy. Strengthening the complementarity of our development strategies will help bring out our comparative strengths in resources, market and labor force, and release the growth potential of the five countries and the creativity of our three billion people, opening up huge space for development.
我们应该在大局上谋划、关键处落子，本着共商、共建、共享原则，寻找发展政策和优先领域的契合点，继续向贸易投资大市场、货币金融大流通、基础设施大联通目标迈进。要从结构性改革、可持续发展等角度入手，在创新创业、产业产能等领域拓展利益汇聚点，交流分享经验，助力彼此经济发展。处理好增长速度和质量、效益的关系，以落实2030年可持续发展议程为契机，谋求经济、社会、环境效益协调统一，实现联动包容发展。
We need to plan well at the macro level and take concrete actions in key areas. Acting in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, we need to identify those areas where our development policies and priorities converge, and continue to work toward the goal of connectivity in trade and investment, currency and finance, and infrastructure. With a focus on structural reform and sustainable development, we need to expand our converging interests and share experience on innovation, entrepreneurship, industrial development and production capacity to boost our respective economic development. It is important to strike a balance between the speed of growth and the quality and efficiency of growth. By implementing the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, we have the opportunity to achieve balanced economic, social and environmental progress, and bring about interconnected and inclusive development.
第三，致力于推动国际秩序朝更加公正合理方向发展。随着我们五国同世界的联系更为紧密，客观上要求我们积极参与全球治理。没有我们五国参与，许多重大紧迫的全球性问题难以有效解决。我们就事关国际和平与发展的问题共同发声，共提方案，既符合国际社会期待，也有助于维护我们的共同利益。
Third, we need to make the international order more just and equitable. Our ever closer ties with the rest of the world require that we play a more active part in global governance. Without our participation, many pressing global challenges cannot be effectively resolved. We should speak with one voice and jointly present our solutions to issues concerning international peace and development. This meets the expectation of the international community, and will help safeguard our common interests.
我们应该坚定奉行多边主义和国际关系基本准则，推动构建新型国际关系，为各国发展创造和平稳定环境。要推动开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，建设开放型世界经济，支持多边贸易体制，反对保护主义。要推进全球经济治理改革，提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权，为解决南北发展失衡、促进世界经济增长提供新动力。
We should remain committed to multilateralism and the basic norms governing international relations, work for a new type of international relations, and foster a peaceful and stable environment for the development of all countries. We need to make economic globalization open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all, build an open world economy, support the multilateral trading regime and oppose protectionism. We need to advance the reform of global economic governance, increase the representation and voice of emerging market and developing countries, and inject new impetus into the efforts to address the development gap between the North and South and boost global growth.
第四，致力于促进人文民间交流。国之交在于民相亲。只有深耕厚植，友谊与合作之树才能枝繁叶茂。加强我们五国人文交流，让伙伴关系理念扎根人民心中，是一项值得长期投入的工作。这项工作做好了，将使金砖合作永葆活力。
Fourth, we need to promote people-to-people exchanges. Amity between the people holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. Only with intensive care can the tree of friendship and cooperation grow luxuriant. Enhancing the exchanges among our peoples and seeing the spirit of partnership embraced by all is a worthy cause that deserves our enduring commitment. A job well done in this regard will keep BRICS cooperation vibrant.
我们高兴地看到，我们五国领导人就加强金砖人文交流达成的重要共识正在变成现实。今年五国人文交流合作全面铺开，举行了运动会、电影节、文化节、传统医药高级别会议等丰富多彩的活动。希望在我们共同关心和推动下，这些活动能够经常化、机制化，并努力深入基层，面向广大民众，营造百花齐放的生动局面。
We are pleased to note that the important consensus reached at the leadership level on closer people-to-people exchanges is being translated into reality. This year, people-to-people exchanges among our five countries have been in full swing, marked by the diverse activities of the BRICS Games, the BRICS Film Festival, the BRICS Culture Festival and the High-level Meeting on Traditional Medicine. We hope that through our joint efforts, these activities will take place regularly and be institutionalized. We need to expand our outreach to get the public more involved and encourage more lively exchanges of diverse cultures.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
过去10年，是金砖国家集中精力谋发展的10年，也是坚持不懈深化伙伴关系的10年。在金砖合作的历史进程中，10年只是一个开端。正如年初我在致各位同事的信中所说，展望未来，金砖合作必将得到更大发展，也必将在国际事务中发挥更大作用。让我们共同努力，推动金砖合作从厦门再次扬帆远航，开启第二个“金色十年”的大门，使金砖合作造福我们五国人民，惠及各国人民！
The past decade has seen the unremitting efforts of BRICS countries in pursuing development and deepening partnership. It is but a beginning in the history of BRICS cooperation. As I said in my letters to you early this year, looking ahead, BRICS cooperation is set to achieve greater development and play an even bigger role in international affairs. Let us set sail from Xiamen and join hands to usher in the second “Golden Decade” of BRICS cooperation and deliver greater benefits to the people of our five countries and around the world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.