40. 习近平在APEC第26次领导人非正式会议上的讲话
把握时代机遇　共谋亚太繁荣
Harnessing Opportunities of Our Times
To Jointly Pursue Prosperity in the Asia-Pacific
——在亚太经合组织第二十六次领导人非正式会议上的发言
（2018年11月18日，莫尔兹比港）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 26th APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting
Port Moresby, 18 November 2018 
尊敬的奥尼尔总理，
各位同事：
Honorable Prime Minister Peter O'Neill,
Dear Colleagues, 
很高兴同大家相聚在美丽的莫尔兹比港。亚太经合组织成员领导人首次在太平洋岛国地区聚首，围绕“把握包容性机遇，拥抱数字化未来”的主题，回顾合作历程，共商亚太愿景。我谨对巴布亚新几内亚政府特别是奥尼尔总理为筹备本次会议付出的努力，表示衷心的感谢！
It gives me great pleasure to join you in the beautiful city of Port Moresby. This is the first time for us APEC economic leaders to meet in the Pacific Islands region. We gather under the theme "Harnessing Inclusive Opportunities, Embracing the Digital Future" to review what we have achieved in our cooperation and chart the course for the future of the Asia-Pacific. I wish to thank the Papua New Guinean government and Prime Minister O'Neill in particular for the commendable efforts you have put in to host this meeting. 
当今世界，发展和变革风起云涌。新科技革命和产业变革深入发展，全球治理体系深刻重塑，国际格局加速演变。同时，全球发展深层次矛盾突出，保护主义、单边主义思潮抬头，多边贸易体制受到冲击，世界经济整体发展环境面临诸多风险和不确定性。
Our world is undergoing rapid development and changes. A new round of technological and industrial revolution is unfolding. The system of global governance is being profoundly reshaped; and the evolution of the international architecture is accelerating. On the other hand, global development faces acute deep-seated problems. Protectionism and unilateralism are resurfacing. The multilateral trading system is under assault. The global economic environment is fraught with risks and uncertainties. 
“智者顺时而谋。”站在历史前进的十字路口，我们应该认清世界大势，把握经济脉动，明确未来方向，解答时代命题。
As a line in the Chinese classics reads, "A man of vision sees the trend of the times and follows it." We have reached a crossroads of history, when we must have a keen appreciation of the trend of our world and take the pulse of the world economy. That is how we will be able to respond to the call of our time and chart our future course accordingly. 
第一，坚持推进区域经济一体化，构建开放型亚太经济。我们应该持续推进贸易和投资自由化便利化。通往亚太自由贸易区的路途不会平坦，但我们要始终朝着这个大方向、大目标迈进。对各类自由贸易安排，我们应该坚持开放、包容、透明原则，促进彼此协调，实现良性互动。我们应坚定维护以规则为基础的多边贸易体制，旗帜鲜明抵制保护主义。世界贸易组织正在探讨新一轮改革，改革的目的应该是让其更好发挥作用，坚持多边贸易体制的核心价值和基本原则，而不是推倒重来。我们应该引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
First, we need to advance economic integration in our region so as to build an open economy in the Asia-Pacific. We should continue to promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation. The road toward a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) will not be smooth. Yet, we need to remain committed to this goal and move toward it. We need to adopt an open, inclusive and transparent approach to the various kinds of free trade arrangements to ensure coordinated and positive interactions among them. We need to firmly uphold the rules-based multilateral trading system and say no to protectionism. The World Trade Organization is exploring a new round of reform. Such reform should be designed to enable the WTO to better play its role and uphold the core values and underlying principles of the multilateral trading system instead of having the Organization overhauled. What we need is to make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial for all. 
今年是中国改革开放40周年。中国将坚定不移全面深化改革，加快完善社会主义市场经济体制，建设现代化经济体系。中国将坚持对外开放基本国策，大幅度放宽市场准入，加大保护知识产权力度，创造更具吸引力的投资和营商环境。一周前，首届中国国际进口博览会在上海成功举行，吸引了172个国家、地区和国际组织，3600多家企业参展，40多万名境内外采购商到会洽谈采购，成交额达到578亿美元。4500多名各界知名人士出席虹桥国际经贸论坛。这再次表明，中国支持自由开放贸易、主动向世界开放市场的决心不会有任何动摇。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up initiative. China will pursue with resolve continued reform across the board. We will speed up efforts to improve our socialist market economy and put in place a modern economic system. China will continue to pursue its fundamental policy of opening-up by significantly expanding market access, better protecting intellectual property rights, and making our investment and business environment more attractive. The first China International Import Expo, which was successfully concluded in Shanghai just a week ago, was attended by 172 countries, regions and international organizations, and 3,600-plus companies and over 400,000 Chinese and foreign buyers who sealed 57.8 billion U.S. dollars worth of deals. The Hongqiao International Economic and Trade Forum held alongside the Expo was attended by over 4,500 leading personages from various sectors. This sent one more message about China's strong commitment to support free and open trade and to voluntarily open its market to the world. 
第二，坚持创新驱动，培育增长新动能。数字经济是亚太乃至全球未来的发展方向。我们应该牢牢把握创新发展时代潮流，全面平衡落实《互联网和数字经济路线图》，释放数字经济增长潜能。同时，我们应该加强数字基础设施和能力建设，增强数字经济可及性，消弭数字鸿沟，让处于不同发展阶段的成员共享数字经济发展成果，让亚太地区人民搭上数字经济发展快车。
Second, we need to pursue innovation-driven growth and foster new growth drivers. Digital economy represents the development of the future for both the Asia-Pacific and the world at large. We need to recognize and follow the trend of innovation-driven development as a trend of the times, and fully implement the Internet and Digital Economy Roadmap in a balanced way, so as to unleash the growth potential of digital economy. We need to promote the building of digital infrastructure and capacity, make digital economy more accessible and bridge the digital divide. Our goal should be for the benefits of digital economy to reach all member economies at different stages of development and for the people of the Asia-Pacific to get aboard the fast train of a growing digital economy. 
中国正在大力建设“数字中国”，在“互联网+”、人工智能等领域收获一批创新成果。分享经济、网络零售、移动支付等新技术新业态新模式不断涌现，深刻改变了中国老百姓生活。中国愿同亚太各方深化数字经济合作，培育更多利益契合点和经济增长点，为亚太经济注入强大新动能。
China is endeavoring to build a "Digital China". Many innovations have been made in areas such as Internet Plus and artificial intelligence. New technologies and new forms and models of business like sharing economy, online retail, and mobile payment continue to emerge in China, bringing profound changes to the lives of the Chinese people. China seeks deeper cooperation on digital economy with other members of the Asia-Pacific so as to expand convergence of interests and create more growth areas, thus adding strong and fresh impetus to the Asia-Pacific economy. 
第三，坚持完善互联互通网络，促进包容联动发展。互联互通是实现包容联动发展的基础。我们应该深入落实互联互通蓝图，让联通的网络覆盖太平洋沿岸的每一个角落。我们应该以2030年可持续发展议程为引领，采取更多务实举措，让发展更加均衡、增长更可持续、机会更加平等、社会更加包容。
Third, we need to improve the connectivity network to promote inclusive and interconnected development. Connectivity is the foundation of inclusive and interconnected development. Efforts are required to turn our connectivity blueprint into reality and extend our connectivity network to every corner along the Pacific shores. We need to take the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a guide and adopt more concrete steps to make development more balanced, growth more sustainable, opportunities more equal and societies more inclusive. 
中国高度重视互联互通建设。经过5年努力，共建“一带一路”正进入深入发展新阶段。明年4月，中国将主办第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。中国将同各国一道，坚持共商共建共享，高质量、高标准、高水平建设“一带一路”，为亚太和世界各国人民创造更大发展机遇。
China takes it a high priority to strengthen connectivity. Thanks to five years of joint efforts, cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative has entered a new phase of full implementation. China will host the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation in April next year. China will work with all countries involved under the principle of consultation and collaboration for shared benefits to pursue the Belt and Road Initiative against high standards so that it will deliver quality outcomes and create even greater development opportunities for the people in the Asia-Pacific and beyond. 
第四，坚持深化伙伴关系，携手应对共同挑战。亚太经合组织走过近30年合作历程，互信、包容、合作、共赢的伙伴关系已经成为我们的共同财富。亚太各国国情千差万别，有分歧并不奇怪。关键是要坚持共谋发展这个公约数，发扬伙伴精神，协商处理分歧，探索解决共同挑战。我们应该立足多样性实际，尊重彼此选择的发展道路，在开放包容的基础上交融互鉴，在良性竞争的同时互利合作，共同构建亚太命运共同体。
Fourth, we need to forge a closer partnership and jointly meet common challenges. APEC has traversed a journey of cooperation for close to 30 years; and it has fostered a partnership featuring mutual trust, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, something we all hold dear. As we Asia-Pacific countries vary in national conditions, differences among us are normal. What is important is for us to stay committed to the shared goal of common development, address differences through consultation and explore solutions to common challenges in the spirit of partnership. We need to respect diversity and each other's choices of development path, promote integration and mutual learning on the basis of openness and inclusiveness, and engage in both healthy competition and mutually beneficial cooperation. With these efforts, we can jointly build a community with a shared future in the Asia-Pacific. 
中国坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，践行创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念。过去几十年，中国7亿多人口摆脱贫困，将在2020年实现全面脱贫。中国经济对世界经济增长的贡献率一直保持在30%以上。同时正在加快从高速增长转向高质量发展。今年，消费对中国经济增长的贡献达到78%。中国经济长期稳定向好的总体势头会继续保持下去。
China follows a people-centered development philosophy and a new development vision that features innovative, coordinated, green and open development for the benefit of all. In the past few decades, China has lifted more than 700 million people out of poverty and will completely eliminate poverty by 2020. The Chinese economy has been contributing over 30 percent of the global growth for many years. Its shift from high-speed to high-quality growth is gathering pace. For one thing, consumption accounts for 78 percent of China's growth this year. The overall momentum of sustained and sound growth will continue. 
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues, 
作为亚太地区领导人，我们有责任登高望远，规划好亚太经合组织2020年后的合作愿景。我们应该顺应经济全球化发展大势，不为一时的困难所阻挡，继续秉持推动区域经济一体化宗旨，把握构建开放型世界经济大方向，努力保持亚太合作势头，稳步迈向更高水平。
As leaders of the Asia-Pacific, we share a common responsibility to chart the long-term development course for APEC and draw up a post-2020 vision. We should follow the underlying trend of economic globalization and prevail over difficulties as they arise. We should remain committed to our goal of economic integration in the region and work toward the direction of an open global economy. We should keep the momentum of Asia-Pacific cooperation and steadily bring it to a higher level. 
中国是亚太合作的积极倡导者和坚定践行者。中国的发展离不开同亚太各方的紧密合作，也为亚太发展拓展了广阔空间。中国将深入参与亚太合作进程，加大投入，同各方深化务实合作，为亚太地区发展繁荣作出新贡献！
China is a champion of Asia-Pacific cooperation and has taken concrete steps to promote cooperation on the ground. Close cooperation with other members of the Asia-Pacific is indispensable for China's development. China's development, on its part, offers broad opportunities of development for the Asia-Pacific. China will stay deeply engaged in the Asia-Pacific cooperation process, increase its input, deepen practical cooperation with other parties involved, and make new contribution to the development and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. 
谢谢大家。
Thank you!