12. 习近平在联合国成立75周年纪念峰会上的讲话
（2020年9月21日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the High-level Meeting to
Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations
Beijing, 21 September 2020
主席先生，
各位同事：
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
75年前，世界人民经过浴血奋战，赢得世界反法西斯战争伟大胜利。这是正义的胜利、人民的胜利。
Seventy-five years ago, the people of the world, with strenuous struggle and tremendous sacrifice, won the great victory in the World Anti-Fascist War. It was indeed a victory for justice and a victory for the people.
在上个世纪前半叶人类两度身历惨不堪言的战祸之后，联合国应运而生。联合国风雨兼程，走过了75年不平凡历程。世界和平与发展掀开新篇章。
Through the first half of the last century, mankind had suffered the scourge of two devastating wars that brought untold sufferings to the world. It was against such a backdrop that the United Nations (UN) came into being. Over the ensuing 75 years, this Organization has traveled an extraordinary journey. A new chapter has thus opened for peace and development in the world.
——联合国的75年，是人类社会迅速发展的75年。我们经历了深刻广泛的科技发展和工业革命，正在迎来新一轮更大范围、更深层次的科技革命和产业变革，世界社会生产力得到极大解放和发展，人类战胜困难和改造世界的能力空前提高。
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has seen dramatic progress in human society. We have experienced significant and across-the-board progress in science and technology and in industrial revolution. We are now embracing a new round of even more extensive and substantial scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation. Globally, social productivity has been unprecedentedly unleashed and boosted. Mankind has never been so powerfully capable to overcome the difficulties we face and change the world we live in.
——联合国的75年，是国际形势深刻变化的75年。广大发展中国家赢得民族解放和国家独立，10多亿人口摆脱贫困，几十亿人口迈上现代化征程，极大增强了世界和平与发展的力量，深刻改变了世界格局。
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has witnessed profound changes in the international situation. A great many developing countries have gained national liberation and independence. Over a billion people have walked out of poverty. And a population of several billion have embarked on a path toward modernization. These achievements have considerably strengthened the force for peace and development in the world and transformed the international landscape in a most far-reaching way.
——联合国的75年，是多边主义快速发展的75年。世界问题多得很、大得很，全球性挑战日益上升，应该也只能通过对话合作解决。国际上的事大家商量着办，同舟共济已经成为国际社会广泛共识。
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has been a period of rapid development of multilateralism. Problems facing the world are big and many, and global challenges are on the increase. They should and can only be resolved through dialogue and cooperation. International affairs ought to be addressed through consultation among us all. The understanding that we are all in the same boat is now a popular consensus in the global community.
风雨过后是彩虹。经历一次又一次考验，联合国仍然充满生机，寄托着70多亿人民对美好生活的向往，联合国宪章仍然是世界和平与发展的重要保障。
After the storm comes the rainbow. The UN has stood one test after another and emerged with renewed vigor and vitality. The UN embodies the aspiration of the over seven billion people for a better life, and the UN Charter remains an important guarantee for world peace and development.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
当今世界正经历百年未有之大变局，突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情对全世界是一次严峻考验。人类已经进入互联互通的新时代，各国利益休戚相关、命运紧密相连。全球性威胁和挑战需要强有力的全球性应对。
Major changes unseen in a century are taking place in our world. The sudden attack of COVID-19 is a grave test for the entire world. Mankind has entered a new era of interconnectedness, with countries sharing intertwined interests and their future closely linked together. Global threats and global challenges require strong, global responses.
面对新形势新挑战，我们必须严肃思考：世界需要一个什么样的联合国？在后疫情时代，联合国应该如何发挥作用？我提几点建议。
In the face of new realities and challenges, we must do some serious thinking: What kind of UN is needed for the world? How should the Organization play its role in the post-COVID era? Let me share some of my thoughts with you.
第一，主持公道。大小国家相互尊重、一律平等是时代进步的要求，也是联合国宪章首要原则。任何国家都没有包揽国际事务、主宰他国命运、垄断发展优势的权力，更不能在世界上我行我素，搞霸权、霸凌、霸道。单边主义没有出路，要坚持共商共建共享，由各国共同维护普遍安全，共同分享发展成果，共同掌握世界命运。要切实提高发展中国家在联合国的代表性和发言权，使联合国更加平衡地反映大多数国家利益和意愿。
First, the UN must stand firm for justice. Mutual respect and equality among all countries, big or small, represents the progress of our times and is the foremost principle of the UN Charter. No country has the right to dominate global affairs, control the destiny of others, or keep advantages in development all to itself. Even less should one be allowed to do whatever it likes and be the hegemon, bully or boss of the world. Unilateralism is a dead end. All need to follow the approach of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. All need to come together to uphold universal security, share the fruits of development, and jointly decide on the future of the world. It is imperative that the representation and voice of developing countries be increased so that the UN could be more balanced in reflecting the interests and wishes of the majority of countries in the world.
第二，厉行法治。联合国宪章宗旨和原则是处理国际关系的根本遵循，也是国际秩序稳定的重要基石，必须毫不动摇加以维护。各国关系和利益只能以制度和规则加以协调，不能谁的拳头大就听谁的。大国更应该带头做国际法治的倡导者和维护者，遵信守诺，不搞例外主义，不搞双重标准，也不能歪曲国际法，以法治之名侵害他国正当权益、破坏国际和平稳定。
Second, the UN must uphold the rule of law. The purposes and principles of the UN Charter are the fundamental guidelines for handling international relations. They constitute a cornerstone of stable international order and must be unswervingly kept and upheld. Relations among countries and coordination of their interests must only be based on rules and institutions; they must not be lorded over by those who wave a strong fist at others. Big countries should lead by example in advocating and upholding the international rule of law and in honoring their commitments. There must be no practice of exceptionalism or double standards. Nor should international law be distorted and used as a pretext to undermine other countries’ legitimate rights and interests or world peace and stability.
第三，促进合作。促进国际合作是联合国成立的初衷，也是联合国宪章重要宗旨。靠冷战思维，以意识形态划线，搞零和游戏，既解决不了本国问题，更应对不了人类面临的共同挑战。我们要做的是，以对话代替冲突，以协商代替胁迫，以共赢代替零和，把本国利益同各国共同利益结合起来，努力扩大各国共同利益汇合点，建设和谐合作的国际大家庭。
Third, the UN must promote cooperation. To promote cooperation among countries is a founding mission of the UN and an important purpose spelt out in the UN Charter. Cold War mentality, ideological lines or zero-sum game are no solution to a country’s own problem, still less an answer to mankind’s common challenges. What we need to do is to replace conflict with dialogue, coercion with consultation and zero-sum with win-win. We need to pursue the common interests of all as we each work to safeguard our own interests. We need to expand the converging interests of all and build a big global family of harmony and cooperation.
第四，聚焦行动。践行多边主义，不能坐而论道，而要起而行之，不能只开药方，不见疗效。联合国要以解决问题为出发点，以可视成果为导向，平衡推进安全、发展、人权，特别是要以落实《2030年可持续发展议程》为契机，把应对公共卫生等非传统安全挑战作为联合国工作优先方向，把发展问题置于全球宏观框架突出位置，更加重视促进和保护生存权和发展权。
Fourth, the UN must focus on real action. To put into practice the principle of multilateralism, we must act, not just talk. There must be a cure, not just a therapy. The UN should aim at problem solving and move toward tangible outcomes as it advances security, development and human rights in parallel. In particular, as the UN advances its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, priority should be given to addressing non-traditional security challenges such as public health; the issue of development should be highlighted in the global macro framework; and there should be a greater emphasis on the promotion and protection of the rights to subsistence and development.
中国是第一个在联合国宪章上签字的国家，是联合国创始会员国，也是安理会常任理事国中唯一一个发展中国家。我们将始终做多边主义的践行者，积极参与全球治理体系改革和建设，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，坚定维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序，坚定维护联合国在国际事务中的核心作用。
China was the first to sign on the Charter of the United Nations. It is a founding member of the UN and the only developing country that takes a permanent seat on the Security Council. China will continue to be a true follower of multilateralism. It will stay actively engaged in reforming and developing the global governance system. It will firmly uphold the UN-centered international system, firmly uphold the international order underpinned by international law, and firmly defend the UN’s central role in international affairs.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
世界正站在一个新的历史起点上。让我们重申对多边主义的坚定承诺，推动构建人类命运共同体，在联合国旗帜下实现更大团结和进步！
The world now stands at a new historical starting point. Let us renew our firm commitment to multilateralism, work to promote a community with a shared future for mankind, and rally behind the banner of the UN to pursue greater unity and progress.
谢谢。
Thank you.