4. 习近平在G20领导人第15次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
勠力战疫　共创未来
Together, Let Us Fight COVID-19 and Create a Better Future
——在二十国集团领导人第十五次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
（2020年11月21日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At Session I of the 15th G20 Leaders’ Summit
Beijing, 21 November 2020
尊敬的萨勒曼国王，
各位同事：
Your Majesty King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud,
Dear Colleagues,
首先，我谨对沙特阿拉伯作为主席国，特别是国王陛下本人，为举办这次峰会付出的巨大努力表示衷心感谢！
I wish to begin by expressing heartfelt thanks to the Saudi Presidency and especially Your Majesty King Salman for the tremendous efforts in hosting this summit.
即将过去的一年，人类经历了百年来最严重的传染病大流行，超过百万人失去生命，世界经济陷入衰退，社会民生遭遇重创，影响超出2008年发生的国际金融危机。
This outgoing year, humanity has experienced the most serious global pandemic in a century. Over one million people have lost their lives. The world economy is in recession. Societies and livelihoods are taking a big hit. The impact of COVID-19 is even worse than that of the 2008 global financial crisis.
疫情发生后，二十国集团迅速行动起来，领导人特别峰会提出，加强防控合作，推动药物和疫苗研发，维护经济金融稳定，确保产业链、供应链畅通，缓解发展中国家债务负担。这些举措给世界带来信心，为全球抗疫合作引领了方向。在这场应对新冠肺炎疫情的全球战役中，二十国集团再次发挥了不可替代的重要作用。
The G20 has taken swift actions in the wake of COVID-19. At the Extraordinary Summit earlier this year, we agreed to step up cooperation to fight the pandemic. We agreed to advance the R&D of medicines and vaccines, maintain economic and financial stability, keep the industrial and supply chains open, and ease the debt burden of developing countries. These measures have given the world confidence and charted the course for international cooperation against the virus. In this global battle, the G20 has once again played an important and, indeed, irreplaceable role.
当前，全球疫情仍在蔓延，一些国家面临第二波疫情威胁，各国抗疫情、稳经济、保民生之路任重道远。与此同时，国际格局加速演变，单边主义、保护主义上升，全球产业链、供应链受到冲击。我们要在做好常态化疫情防控的同时，努力稳定和恢复经济。我建议，二十国集团在以下几个方面进一步发力。
As we speak, the pandemic is still wreaking havoc across the world, and some countries face the threat of a second wave of infections. To contain the virus, stabilize the economy and protect livelihood remains a long and arduous journey for all countries. In the meantime, the international architecture is evolving at a faster pace. Rising unilateralism and protectionism are causing disruptions to global industrial and supply chains. While containing the virus on an ongoing basis, we must also stabilize and restore economic growth. For the G20, I believe more efforts are needed in the following areas:
第一，构筑全球抗疫防火墙。我们首先要做好各自疫情防控，加强交流合作，并向其他国家施以援手。不少二十国集团成员在疫苗研发和生产方面取得积极进展，要加快行动，并支持世界卫生组织协调整合资源，公平有效分配疫苗。中国积极支持并参与新冠肺炎疫苗国际合作，已经加入“新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”，愿同各国在开展疫苗研发、生产、分配等各环节加强合作。我们将履行承诺，向其他发展中国家提供帮助和支持，努力让疫苗成为各国人民用得上、用得起的公共产品。
First, build a global firewall against COVID-19. We must first put the disease under control at home and, on that basis, strengthen exchanges and cooperation to help countries in need. Several G20 members have made progress in vaccine R&D and production. We should speed up action and support the WHO in mobilizing and consolidating resources and distributing vaccines fairly and efficiently. China actively supports and participates in international cooperation on COVID-19 vaccines. We have joined the COVAX facility and stand ready to step up cooperation with other countries on the R&D, production and distribution of vaccines. We will honor our commitment of giving assistance and support to other developing countries, and work to make vaccines a global public good accessible and affordable to people around the world.
第二，畅通世界经济运行脉络。要在做好疫情防控前提下，恢复全球产业链、供应链安全顺畅运转，降低关税、减少壁垒，探讨重要医疗物资贸易自由化。要加强政策、标准对接，搭建“快捷通道”，便利人员有序往来。中方提出建立基于核酸检测结果、以国际通行二维码为形式的健康码国际互认机制，希望更多国家参与。同时，我们支持二十国集团继续就便利人员往来和货物流通开展机制化合作，搭建全球合作网络。
Second, ensure the smooth functioning of the global economy. While containing the virus, we need to restore the secure and smooth operation of global industrial and supply chains. We need to reduce tariffs and barriers, and explore the liberalization of trade of key medical supplies. We need to further harmonize policies and standards and establish “fast tracks” to facilitate the orderly flow of personnel. China has proposed a global mechanism on the mutual recognition of health certificates based on nucleic acid test results in the form of internationally accepted QR codes. We hope more countries will join this mechanism. We also support the G20 in carrying out institutionalized cooperation and building global cooperation networks to facilitate the flow of personnel and goods.
第三，发挥数字经济的推动作用。疫情激发了5G、人工智能、智慧城市等新技术、新业态、新平台蓬勃兴起，网上购物、在线教育、远程医疗等“非接触经济”全面提速，为经济发展提供了新路径。我们要主动应变、化危为机，深化结构性改革，以科技创新和数字化变革催生新的发展动能。我们要为数字经济营造有利发展环境，加强数据安全合作，加强数字基础设施建设，为各国科技企业创造公平竞争环境。同时，要解决数字经济给就业、税收以及社会弱势群体带来的挑战，弥合数字鸿沟。
Third, harness the role of the digital economy. COVID-19 has fueled the boom of new technologies, new business forms and new platforms such as 5G, artificial intelligence (AI) and smart cities, and accelerated the development of a contact-free economy like online shopping, online education and telemedicine. All this opens new pathways for economic growth. We ought to adapt to change and turn crisis into opportunity. We may deepen structural reform and cultivate new growth drivers through scientific and technological innovation and digital transformation. We could foster an enabling environment for the development of the digital economy, enhance data security cooperation, strengthen the digital infrastructure, and level the playing field for high-tech companies from all countries. Meanwhile, we need to address the challenges posed by the digital economy to employment, taxation and vulnerable groups, and seek to bridge the digital divide.
第四，实现更加包容的发展。我们要继续帮助发展中国家克服疫情带来的困难。中方克服困难，全面落实二十国集团缓债倡议，总额超过13亿美元。中方支持延长缓债倡议期限的决定，将继续同各方一道全力落实，并将对确有困难的国家加大缓债减债力度，鼓励金融机构按市场化原则自主提供新增融资。我们要帮助妇女摆脱疫情影响，关注妇女特殊需要，落实《北京宣言》和《行动纲领》。中方已倡议在2025年再次召开全球妇女峰会，为推动后疫情时代妇女事业发展贡献力量。此外，我们还要高度重视粮食安全挑战，支持联合国明年举办世界粮食峰会。中方倡议适时召开国际粮食减损大会，欢迎二十国集团成员和相关国际组织积极参与。
Fourth, pursue more inclusive development. We should keep our support for developing countries and help them overcome the hardships caused by the pandemic. In spite of its own difficulties, China has fully implemented the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) and put off debt repayment totaling over US$1.3 billion. China supports the decision on DSSI extension and will continue to work with other parties for its full implementation. Meanwhile, China will increase the level of debt suspension and relief for countries facing particular difficulties and encourage its financial institutions to provide new financing support on a voluntary basis and according to market principles. We should help women walk out of the shadow of the pandemic, address their special needs, and implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. China has proposed the convening of another Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in 2025 to contribute to women’s development in the post-COVID era. It is also vital that we take the challenge of food security seriously and support the UN in holding the Food Systems Summit next year. In this connection, China proposes the holding of an international conference on food loss and waste in due course, and welcomes the active participation of G20 members and relevant international organizations.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
新冠肺炎疫情是一次重大挑战，凸显了全球治理存在的短板。国际社会都很关心后疫情时代的国际秩序和全球治理，也很关注二十国集团将发挥什么样的作用。我认为，我们应该遵循共商共建共享原则，坚持多边主义，坚持开放包容，坚持互利合作，坚持与时俱进。二十国集团应该在这方面发挥更大引领作用。
The grave challenge of COVID-19 has exposed the deficiencies of global governance. The international community has a keen interest in the post-COVID international order and global governance as well as the future role for the G20. In my view, the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits should guide our way forward. We should uphold multilateralism, pursue openness and inclusiveness, promote mutually beneficial cooperation and keep pace with the times. The G20 ought to play a bigger role in this process.
第一，加强以联合国为核心的国际体系。联合国是合作处理国际事务的核心机制。各方应该坚定维护联合国权威和地位，恪守联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序。我们支持联合国更有效地凝聚全球共识，动员全球资源，协调全球行动，为世界和平与发展发挥更大作用。
First, we need to strengthen the UN-centered international system. The UN is the core institution for addressing international affairs through cooperation. All countries should firmly support the UN’s authority and standing, follow the purposes and principles of its Charter, and uphold the international order underpinned by international law. We support the UN in more effectively building global consensus, mobilizing global resources and coordinating global actions. We support a bigger role of the UN in promoting world peace and development.
第二，完善经济全球化的治理架构。要坚定维护以规则为基础、透明、非歧视、开放、包容的多边贸易体制，支持世界贸易组织改革，增强其有效性和权威性，促进自由贸易，反对单边主义和保护主义，维护公平竞争，保障发展中国家发展权益和空间。要继续改革国际金融体系，按期完成国际货币基金组织第十六轮份额检查，扩大特别提款权作用，筑牢全球金融安全网，提高发展中国家代表性和发言权。要直面经济全球化遇到的挑战，使经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
Second, we need to improve the governance architecture for economic globalization. We should firmly safeguard the rules-based multilateral trading system that is transparent, nondiscriminatory, open and inclusive, and support the reform of the WTO to enhance its effectiveness and authority. We should promote free trade, oppose unilateralism and protectionism, uphold fair competition, and protect the development rights, interests and space of developing countries. We should continue the reform of the international financial system, conclude the IMF’s 16th General Quota Review on schedule, expand the role of the Special Drawing Rights, buttress the global financial safety net, and raise the representation and voice of developing countries. We should also address the challenges to economic globalization head-on, and make it more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
第三，推动数字经济健康发展。面对各国对数据安全、数字鸿沟、个人隐私、道德伦理等方面的关切，我们要秉持以人为中心、基于事实的政策导向，鼓励创新，建立互信，支持联合国就此发挥领导作用，携手打造开放、公平、公正、非歧视的数字发展环境。前不久，中方提出了《全球数据安全倡议》。我们愿以此为基础，同各方探讨并制定全球数字治理规则。中方支持围绕人工智能加强对话，倡议适时召开专题会议，推动落实二十国集团人工智能原则，引领全球人工智能健康发展。二十国集团还要以开放和包容方式探讨制定法定数字货币标准和原则，在共同推动国际货币体系向前发展过程中，妥善应对各类风险挑战。
Third, we need to promote the sound development of the digital economy. To address countries’ concerns on data security, the digital divide, personal privacy and ethics, we should adopt people-centered and facts-based policies to encourage innovation and build trust. We should support the UN’s leadership role in this field, and work together to foster an open, fair, just and nondiscriminatory environment for building the digital economy. Recently, China launched the Global Initiative on Data Security. We may work on that basis and join other parties for discussing and formulating rules on global digital governance. China supports increased dialogue on AI, and proposes a meeting on this in due course to advance the G20 AI Principles and set the course for the healthy development of AI globally. The G20 also needs to discuss developing the standards and principles for central bank digital currencies with an open and accommodating attitude, and properly handle all types of risks and challenges while pushing collectively for the development of the international monetary system.
第四，提高应对全球性挑战的能力。当前，最紧迫的任务是加强全球公共卫生体系，防控新冠肺炎疫情和其他传染性疾病。要加强世界卫生组织作用，推进全球疾病大流行防范应对，扎牢维护人类健康安全的篱笆，构建人类卫生健康共同体。要加大生态环境领域国际合作力度，保护好地球这个我们赖以生存的共同家园。要进一步减少非必要一次性塑料制品生产和使用。要以明年联合国第二十六次气候变化缔约方大会和第十五次《生物多样性公约》缔约方大会为契机，凝聚更多共识，形成更大合力，共同建设清洁美丽的世界，实现人与自然和谐共存。中方呼吁全面禁止非法交易野生动物，加强野生动植物保护交流和合作。
Fourth, we need to build up capacities for tackling global challenges. The most pressing task of the moment is to shore up the global public health system and contain COVID-19 and other infectious diseases. We need to enhance the role of the WHO, improve pandemic preparedness and response, forge a strong shield for human health and safety, and build a global community of health for all. We need to scale up international cooperation on ecology and environment to protect the planet Earth, our only homeland. We need to further curtail the production and use of non-essential, disposable plastic goods. COP26 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and COP15 of the Convention on Biological Diversity, both to be held next year, may serve as opportunities for forging broader consensus and stronger synergy in building a clean and beautiful world where man and nature coexist in harmony. China calls for a complete ban on illegal trade of wildlife and for stronger exchanges and cooperation on the protection of wild fauna and flora.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
中国在取得抗疫斗争重大战略成果基础上，实现了经济稳步前行。不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。构建新发展格局绝不是闭关内顾，而是要从供给和需求两端同时发力，全面畅通生产、分配、流通、消费各环节，在提高经济韧性和竞争力的同时，建设更高水平的开放型经济新体制。这将为各国共享中国经济高质量发展成果带来更多机遇。
Building on its major strategic gains in fighting COVID-19, China has made steady strides in economic development. The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. This new development paradigm is by no means a closed-door policy. Instead, it urges efforts on both the supply and demand sides to ensure unimpeded flow in production, distribution, exchange and consumption. While making the Chinese economy more resilient and competitive, it also aims to build a new system of open economy of higher standards. This will create more opportunities for the world to benefit from China’s high-quality development.
中国将始终坚持做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。我们愿同所有国家在相互尊重、平等互利基础上和平共处、共同发展，以对话弥合分歧，以谈判化解争端，为世界和平与发展作出共同努力。
China will always be a builder of global peace, a contributor to global development and a defender of international order. On the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, China stands ready to pursue peaceful coexistence and common development with all countries. We may bridge differences through dialogue, resolve disputes through negotiation, and make a joint effort for world peace and development.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
“沉舟侧畔千帆过，病树前头万木春。”后疫情时代的世界，必将如凤凰涅槃、焕发新生。让我们携手努力，共同创造更加美好幸福的生活，共同推动构建人类命运共同体！
As a Chinese poem reads, “Past a fallen ship, one thousand sail onward; for a sick tree, ten thousand thrive by spring.” I believe that when COVID-19 is over, our world will rise from the pandemic and emerge even stronger. In that spirit, let us join hands to deliver a better life for our people and build a community with a shared future for mankind.