29. 习近平接受俄罗斯主流媒体联合采访
问：您即将对俄罗斯进行国事访问并出席第二十三届圣彼得堡国际经济论坛。今年是中俄建交70周年，您和普京总统多次强调，中俄关系处于历史最好时期。您能否对当前中俄关系作一个综合评价？
Q1. President Xi, you are going to pay a state visit to Russia and attend the 23rd St. Petersburg International Economic Forum. This year marks the 70th anniversary of China-Russia diplomatic relations. You and President Putin have often noted that the relationship is at its best in history. Could you give an overall assessment of the current state of our relations?
答：应普京总统邀请，我即将对俄罗斯进行国事访问并出席第二十三届圣彼得堡国际经济论坛。6年前，我当选中华人民共和国主席后，选择俄罗斯作为首次出访的第一站，同普京总统一道掀开中俄关系新篇章。6年来，我7次到访俄罗斯，每次都见证了两国人民深厚情谊，收获了双方合作丰硕成果。今天，在中俄迎来建交70周年的历史性时刻，我满怀对两国关系美好未来的期待，再次踏上俄罗斯广袤美丽的土地。
Xi: At the invitation of President Vladimir Putin, I will soon pay a state visit to Russia and attend the 23rd St. Petersburg International Economic Forum. After I was elected President of the People's Republic of China six years ago, I chose Russia as the first stop of my first overseas trip. During that visit, President Putin and I jointly opened a new chapter of China-Russia relations. Over the past six years, I have paid seven visits to Russia. Every time I was there, I witnessed the deepening of friendship between our two peoples and the productive outcomes of our cooperation. As China and Russia greet the historic moment of the 70th anniversary of our diplomatic relations, I am glad to pay another visit to your vast and beautiful country with great expectations for a brighter future of our bilateral ties.
经过70年发展，中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系处于历史最好时期。两国政治互信牢固，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互坚定支持。双方建立起完备的高层交往和各领域合作机制，开展了内容丰富、具有战略意义的各领域、全方位合作。两国人民在共同抗击法西斯侵略的伟大岁月中结下深厚的战斗情谊，历久弥坚，中俄关系长远发展拥有坚实民意支撑。双方在国际事务中开展了密切有效的协调和配合，为纷繁复杂的国际形势注入强大正能量。
Indeed, after seven decades of development, China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination is now at its best in history. Our two countries enjoy strong political trust and can always count on each other's firm support on issues concerning our respective core interests and major concerns. Guided and underpinned by full-fledged mechanisms of high-level visits and broad-based cooperation, our two sides have conducted substantive, wide-ranging and all-dimensional cooperation of strategic significance. The long-term development of China-Russia relations is blessed by the strong support of our people, who forged a profound friendship as comrades-in-arms in our great, heroic fight against Fascist aggression. Our two sides have also enjoyed close and effective coordination and collaboration in international affairs, thus contributing tremendous positive energy to a complex and fast-changing world.
站在新的历史起点上，中俄关系迎来新的发展机遇。面对两国实现各自发展振兴的共同需要，面对两国人民追求世代友好的共同心声，我们有信心、有能力在过去70年经验成果基础上，推动中俄关系进入更高水平、更大发展的新时代。
Today, China-Russia relations are standing at a new starting point and facing new opportunities for growth. Building on our two countries' shared aspirations for development and revitalization and responding to our two peoples' shared desire for lasting friendship, we have the confidence and capability to bring our relations to a new era of greater development at a higher level, based on our experience and achievements of the past 70 years.
我们要以邻为伴，守望相助，相互给予彼此更加坚定有力的支持；我们要密切合作，深度融通，实现两国发展战略更加紧密的对接，发展利益更加深层次融合，民心民意更加亲密交融；我们要开拓创新，与时俱进，不断扩大完善双方合作新领域，确保两国关系始终具有前瞻性、开创性、发展动能；我们要勇于担当，普惠共赢，在国际事务中发挥更大建设性作用，携手促进世界和平稳定和发展繁荣，惠及世界人民。
Our two countries need to stick together as good neighbors and render each other even stronger support. We need to work closely to seek greater synergy between our development strategies, deeper convergence of our development interests, and closer people-to-people ties. We need to find new areas of cooperation with innovative efforts as called for by the times so that our bilateral relations will always be forward-looking, break new ground, and brim with vigor and vitality. We need to play a more constructive role in international affairs with a great sense of mission and a strong commitment to win-win results, thus jointly promoting peace, stability, development and prosperity for all people of the world.
我期待这次访问俄罗斯期间，同普京总统一道规划两国关系未来发展，推动中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系大踏步迈入新时代。
In my upcoming visit, I look forward to charting the course of our future relationship together with President Putin and to seeing that our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination will stride into a new era.
问：中国是俄罗斯最大贸易伙伴，中俄双边贸易额今年有望达到什么水平？中俄经贸合作领域有哪些具体项目最具前景？中方将采取哪些举措加强两国地方层面的经贸联系？您如何看待中俄经贸合作中存在的问题？
Q2. China is Russia's biggest trading partner. What is the expectation for the bilateral trade volume this year? What are the most promising projects in economic cooperation and trade? What measures will China take to strengthen sub-national economic ties? How do you view the problems in bilateral business cooperation?
答：经贸合作是中俄关系的重要组成部分，是两国共同发展振兴的重要保障。近年来，双方经贸合作日益深化，成果丰硕，成为国与国互利共赢的典范。2018年，双边贸易额突破1000亿美元，创历史新高。在当前国际贸易和投资低迷、保护主义加剧的复杂形势下，中俄经贸合作取得显著成果更显难能可贵。两国政府部门正采取更加积极的措施，争取将双边贸易额提升到更高水平，推动双边贸易高质量发展。
Xi: Economic cooperation and trade, as a key pillar of our relations, is crucial to the common development and revitalization of China and Russia. Such cooperation has been deepening in recent years, producing fruitful outcomes and setting a prime example of mutually beneficial economic engagement. Our bilateral trade reached a record US$100 billion in 2018. These notable results of our business cooperation are especially valuable given the current complex environment of sluggish global trade and investment and surging protectionism in the world. The government departments of our two countries are taking proactive efforts to bring our trade volume to a higher level and promote high-quality development of bilateral trade.
目前，中俄两国能源、交通、农业、航空航天等领域重大合作项目正稳步实施，中俄原油管道及其复线顺利运营，中俄东线天然气管道即将建成供气，黑河公路桥、同江铁路桥成功合龙，远程宽体客机、重型直升机联合研制工作稳步推进，卫星导航系统合作成果显著。可以说，在双方共同努力下，中俄经贸合作已经步入发展的快车道，前景可期。
Our two countries are steadily implementing major cooperation projects in energy, transportation, agriculture, aviation, space and other fields. The crude oil pipeline and its parallel pipeline are operating smoothly. The eastern route of the natural gas pipeline is nearing completion. The Chinese and Russian sections of the Blagoveshchensk-Heihe Highway Bridge and the Nizhneleninskoye-Tongjiang Railway Bridge have been successfully joined. Steady progress is being made in our joint research and development (R&D) of long-range, wide-body passenger aircraft and heavy-lift helicopter. Cooperation on our satellite navigation systems is highly productive. These are concrete examples to show that, through our joint efforts, our economic cooperation has entered a phase of fast development and great promise.
在地方经贸合作层面，两国地方充分借助2018至2019年中俄地方合作交流年契机，利用中国国际进口博览会等经贸合作平台和“东北-远东”、“长江-伏尔加河”等地方合作平台，积极密切交往，稳步推进经贸、投资等务实合作。双方签署远东地区合作发展规划(2018至2024)和东北-远东及贝加尔地区农业发展规划，在“长江-伏尔加河”平台上不断更新重点投资项目清单，为两国地方结合各自产业发展优势深化合作提供了有效平台。
At the sub-national level, various regions in our two countries have seized the opportunity of the "2018-2019 year of sub-national cooperation and exchange" and harnessed various mechanisms for more frequent interactions and greater economic, trade and investment cooperation, which include the China International Import Expo and other business cooperation platforms, and the Northeast China-Russian Far East and the Yangtze River-Volga River cooperation mechanisms. The two sides have signed a Plan on Cooperation and Development in the Russian Far East Region (2018-2024) and a Development Plan for Agriculture in Northeast China and the Russian Far East and Baikal Regions. Constant updates are being made to the list of key investment projects under the Yangtze River-Volga River mechanism. All these are effective platforms for the two sides to leverage our comparative industrial strengths and deepen sub-national cooperation.
当然，中俄经贸合作中还存在一些具体问题。我想强调，这些问题是伴随两国合作不断推进、相互融合日益深入而产生的。有效解决问题的途径就是创新思路，多措并举，不断拓展合作领域，深挖合作潜力，扩大相互投资、市场准入，提升贸易和投资便利化水平，大力推动农产品贸易、电子商务、服务贸易等领域合作发展，做大双方共同利益“蛋糕”，促进中俄经贸合作提质增量，迈上更高台阶。
Of course, our bilateral business ties are not free from specific issues. But it is worth pointing out that they are the natural result of our deepening cooperation and growing shared interests. The most effective way to address them is to take an innovative and multi-pronged approach to expand cooperation areas and unlock the full potential of our practical cooperation, such as scaling up mutual investment, widening market access, facilitating trade and investment activities, and boosting cooperation in agricultural trade, e-commerce and trade in services. By enlarging common interests, we can upgrade our business cooperation so that it will improve in both quality and quantity.
问：您如何看待中国经济发展前景？
Q3. Could you share some insights on China's economic outlook?
答：新中国成立70年来，特别是改革开放40年来，中国经济发展取得举世瞩目的成就，中国成为世界第二大经济体以及制造业、货物贸易、外汇储备第一大国。2018年，中国经济总量跨过90万亿元人民币大关，人均国内生产总值接近1万美元，经济增速6.6%，位居世界前列，对世界经济增长贡献率约30%。
Xi: The Chinese economy has achieved tremendous growth since the founding of New China 70 years ago, and especially since the start of reform and opening-up 40 years ago. China is now the world's second largest economy, the largest manufacturer, the largest trader in goods, and holder of the largest foreign exchange reserves. In 2018, the Chinese economy passed the RMB90 trillion yuan mark and per capita GDP was close to US$10,000. Our 6.6 percent economic growth rate, one of the highest in the world, meant that China accounted for around 30 percent of global growth last year.
今年以来，面对世界经济增长和国际贸易有所放缓的大环境，中国经济开局良好，主要经济指标保持在合理区间。一季度国内生产总值增长6.4%，连续14个季度经济增速保持在6.4%至6.8%区间，延续近年来平稳增长态势，国内消费继续发挥对经济增长的主引擎作用；就业持续增加，前4个月城镇新增就业459万人，居民收入增长略快于经济增长；物价水平保持总体稳定，居民消费价格温和上涨2%；进出口总额同比增长4.3%，外汇储备保持在3万亿美元以上。同时，中国的经济结构在优化，发展方式在转变，质量效益在提升，稳中向好态势更趋明显。
In spite of a slowdown in global growth and trade, the Chinese economy has had a strong start this year with key economic indicators kept in a proper range. In the first quarter, our GDP grew by 6.4 percent, sustaining its momentum of steady growth in recent years and representing the 14th consecutive quarter of staying in the 6.4 percent to 6.8 percent range. Domestic consumption remained the main driver of growth. Employment continued to expand, with 4.59 million urban jobs added in the first four months of 2019. Personal income grew faster than the economy. Prices were generally stable, with consumer prices posting a modest growth of 2 percent. Total imports and exports were up by 4.3 percent year-on-year, and China's foreign exchange reserves stayed above US$3 trillion. Apart from all this, we were able to improve the economic structure, transform the model of development and enhance the quality and efficiency of economic performance, thus strengthening the momentum of steady and robust growth.
稳中向好、长期向好是中国经济没有改变也不会改变的大趋势。展望未来，中国经济平稳健康可持续发展具备充足支撑条件。一是资源潜力，中国有近14亿人口、9亿劳动力、1.7亿受过高等教育和拥有技能的人才资源、全球最大的中等收入群体、1亿多个市场主体；二是内生动力，中国经济增长主要靠内需拉动，2018年内需对经济增长贡献率达108.6%，其中最终消费贡献率达76.2%；三是发展活力，中国研发投入全球排名第二，约占经济总量2.18%，以战略性新兴产业、分享经济等为代表的新动能不断壮大；四是调控能力，有中国共产党的坚强领导，有集中力量办大事的政治优势，有万众一心、众志成城的民族精神，有改革开放以来持续高速发展积累的雄厚物质技术基础，有巨大发展韧性、潜力、回旋余地，有丰富的宏观调控经验和充足的政策空间，我们完全有条件、有能力、有信心应对各种风险挑战。
The trajectory of our economy toward more steady growth has not changed and will remain so in the long run. Looking ahead, a number of factors will support the steady, healthy and sustainable growth of the economy. These include: First, China's large pool of human resources. China has a population of nearly 1.4 billion, a 900-million-strong workforce, a talent pool of 170 million college graduates and people with professional skills, the world's largest middle-income population, and more than 100 million market entities. Second, China's strong internal driving forces. The Chinese economy is mainly driven by domestic consumption. In 2018, domestic consumption contributed 108.6 percent of economic growth; in particular, the contribution of final consumption was as high as 76.2 percent. Third, China's growing economic dynamism. China's R&D spending ranks second in the world, accounting for around 2.18 percent of its GDP. Emerging strategic industries, the sharing economy and other new economic forces are seeing continuous expansion. Fourth, China's mobilization capability. We have in China the strong leadership of the Communist Party of China, the political advantage that comes from being able to mobilize resources for major undertakings, the spirit of a nation united as one, the solid material and technological foundation built through decades of rapid development in the era of reform and opening-up, the enormous resilience, potential and flexibility in development, and the rich experience in macro-regulation as well as ample policy space. We therefore have all the necessary conditions as well as the capability and confidence to deal with any risks and challenges.
问：今年4月您成功主持召开了第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。您如何看待欧亚经济联盟同共建“一带一路”倡议对接的前景？如何评价北极航道的发展潜力和对实现共建“一带一路”倡议的重要意义？中方将如何参与发展北极航道基础设施建设？
Q4. President Xi, you successfully hosted the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation (BRF) in April. How do you see the future of connecting the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) and the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)? What is your take on the potential of the Arctic shipping routes and its significance for advancing Belt and Road cooperation? In what way will China participate in infrastructure development for the Arctic shipping routes?
答：中方提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的是聚焦互联互通，深化务实合作，携手应对人类面临的各种风险挑战，实现互利共赢、共同发展。今年4月，第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功召开，各方就相关议题进行深入探讨，完善了合作理念，明确了合作重点，强化了合作机制，就高质量共建“一带一路”达成广泛共识。应我邀请，普京总统连续两届来华出席“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛，中方对此高度评价。
Xi: The BRI put forth by China aims to deepen practical cooperation focusing on connectivity, jointly address risks and challenges facing humanity, and bring about mutual benefit and common development. The second BRF held in Beijing last April was a great success. The participants had in-depth discussions on relevant topics and reached broad-based consensus on promoting high-quality Belt and Road cooperation supported by refined principles, clearer priorities and stronger mechanisms. We are highly appreciative that President Putin has attended both of the two BRFs held in 2017 and this year at my invitation.
共建“一带一路”和欧亚经济联盟都致力于实现各自国家和地区发展振兴，致力于促进区域开放包容合作。双方在诸多合作领域拥有广泛共同利益。2015年5月，我和普京总统共同签署《关于丝绸之路经济带建设和欧亚经济联盟建设对接合作的联合声明》，开启对接合作之路。去年，中国同欧亚经济联盟签署经贸合作协定，这是双方对接合作迈出的重要一步，也是对接合作的重要早期收获，为深化双方经贸合作提供了制度性保障。下一步，我们愿同俄方一道，深化对接合作，相互支持，相互促进，积极推动《欧亚经济伙伴关系协定》谈判，不断提升区域贸易和投资便利化水平，为两国发展振兴和本地区繁荣稳定作出更大贡献。
The BRI and the EAEU are both committed to facilitating the development and rejuvenation of the participating countries and regions and to promoting open and inclusive cooperation in our region. China and Russia have shared interests in many areas of cooperation. In May 2015, President Putin and I signed a Joint Statement on Cooperation on Joint Silk Road Economic Belt and Eurasian Economic Union Projects, kicking off the process to connect the two initiatives. Last year, China signed an agreement on economic and trade cooperation with the EAEU. It was a significant first step and an important "early harvest" in connecting the two initiatives that provides the institutional underpinning for stronger economic cooperation and trade between the two sides. China will work with Russia to foster stronger synergy between the two initiatives in the spirit of mutual support, advance negotiations on an Eurasian economic partnership agreement, enhance facilitation of regional trade and investment, and make a still greater contribution to the development and rejuvenation of our two countries and the prosperity and stability of our region.
开发利用北极航道将为“一带一路”建设同欧亚经济联盟对接合作提供新契机、增添新平台、注入新动力，有利于加强中俄两国同相关各方互联互通和互利共赢。安全和环保对北极通航至关重要。中方鼓励有关中国企业积极参与，为航道商业化运作和当地经济社会发展作出实实在在的贡献。同时，相关工作应该确保绿色环保以及开发利用的可持续性，做到互利双赢、互利多赢，既有利于促进中俄合作，也有利于促进世界经济增长。
Development and use of the Arctic shipping routes will provide new opportunities, a new platform and new impetus for synergizing the BRI and the EAEU. It is also conducive to better connectivity and mutually beneficial cooperation among China, Russia and other relevant parties. Security and environmental protection are crucial in developing these routes. We encourage Chinese companies to take an active part and make practical contributions to the commercial operation of the Arctic shipping routes and local economic and social development. At the same time, environmental standards must be met and sustainability ensured in the development and use of the Arctic shipping routes. We hope there will be win-win results for all involved - a plus for both China-Russia cooperation and world economic growth.
问：您如何评价中俄在金砖国家和上海合作组织框架内的合作，以及金砖国家和上海合作组织的发展前景？
Q5. How do you see China-Russia cooperation within the frameworks of BRICS and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), and the development prospects of the two?
答：10多年来，金砖国家秉持开放包容、合作共赢的金砖精神，不断深化经贸财金、政治安全、人文交流合作，成为国际事务中一支积极、稳定、建设性的重要力量。事实证明，金砖国家代表世界发展的正确方向，合作之路越走越宽，未来充满希望。
Xi: Over the last 10-plus years, BRICS countries have followed the BRICS spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, deepened exchanges and cooperation in economic and financial, political and security, and cultural and people-to-people fields, making BRICS an important force that plays an active, stabilizing and constructive role in international affairs. It has been proven that BRICS represents the right direction of global development, as evidenced by its ever-widening cooperation and promising future.
俄罗斯是金砖国家领导人会晤的发源地。2009年，金砖国家领导人在叶卡捷琳堡举行首次会晤，开启金砖合作的历史篇章。2015年，金砖国家领导人乌法会晤通过《金砖国家经济伙伴战略》，成为五国经济合作的一个里程碑。
Russia is the birthplace of the BRICS Summit. It was in Yekaterinburg that BRICS leaders held their first meeting in 2009, opening a historic chapter in BRICS cooperation. The adoption of the BRICS Economic Partnership Strategy at the 2015 Ufa Summit was another milestone in BRICS economic cooperation.
我们身处不同的大陆，但发展经济、让人民过上更好生活的共同追求，以及在国际和地区事务中发挥更大作用的共同愿望使我们走到一起。
Coming from different continents, BRICS countries are brought together by a shared aspiration to grow our economies, deliver better lives for our peoples, and play a bigger role in regional and international affairs.
当今世界面临百年未有之大变局，金砖国家的发展既有机遇，也有挑战。五国应该更加紧密地团结在一起，平等相待、互帮互助，深化金砖战略伙伴关系，维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益和发展空间，谋求共同发展进步。今年11月，金砖国家领导人将在巴西利亚举行会晤。我希望并相信，五国将共同推动巴西利亚会晤取得丰硕成果，朝着实现第二个“金色十年”愿景迈出新的坚定步伐。
The world today is undergoing major changes rarely seen in a century. This means both opportunities and challenges for the development of BRICS countries. Such a backdrop makes it all the more important for our five countries to stay united in the spirit of equality and mutual assistance, and deepen the BRICS strategic partnership to defend the common interests and development space of emerging markets and developing countries and achieve development and progress for all. We BRICS leaders will meet again in Brasilia in November. I hope and believe that our five countries will work together for a fruitful Summit, and take further, solid steps toward our vision of the second Golden Decade.
中俄两国是全面战略协作伙伴，同为金砖国家重要成员。双方一直在金砖国家框架内保持密切沟通和协调。俄方明年将担任金砖主席国，中方期待同俄方加强协作，在每任主席国接续努力中，推动金砖国家合作不断取得新的更大成果，更好造福五国人民，也为世界和平与发展作出更大贡献。
China and Russia are comprehensive strategic partners of coordination, and important members of BRICS. Our two countries have had close communication and coordination within the BRICS framework. As Russia will take over the BRICS chairmanship next year, China looks forward to strengthening coordination with Russia to make sure that with the sustained efforts of successive chairmanships, BRICS cooperation will yield still greater results to deliver more benefits to the people of our five countries and contribute more to world peace and development.
上海合作组织是中俄双方共同致力于建设新型国际关系的成功实践和有益平台。上海合作组织成立18年来，中俄两国密切协调和配合，共同推动组织不断发展壮大，为地区和平稳定和发展繁荣作出了重要贡献。我认为，两国在上海合作组织框架内的合作主要有以下特点：
The SCO is a successful example of the commitment of both China and Russia to forging a new type of international relations and a good platform for such efforts. In the 18 years since the SCO's inception, China and Russia have maintained close coordination and collaboration. As a result, the Organization has kept growing and made important contribution to peace, stability, development and prosperity in our region. As I see it, China-Russia cooperation in the SCO has the following features:
一是始终着眼弘扬“上海精神”。互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”是上海合作组织的核心理念。中俄双方携手其他成员国，坚决摒弃文明冲突、冷战思维、零和博弈等陈旧观念，构建起不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三方的建设性伙伴关系，树立了相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系典范。
First, we have stayed committed to the Shanghai Spirit. The Shanghai Spirit of mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations, and pursuit of common development is the underlying philosophy of the SCO. China and Russia, together with other SCO member states, have firmly rejected such anachronistic ideas as clash of civilizations, Cold War mentality, and zero-sum game. Instead, we have forged a constructive partnership featuring non-alliance, non-confrontation and not targeting any third party, and set up a paradigm of a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness and justice, and win-win cooperation.
二是始终着眼促进成员国安全和发展利益。谋稳定、促发展是地区国家的共同期待。中俄双方携手其他成员国，全面深化政治、安全、经济、人文等领域合作，妥善应对新的安全威胁和挑战，加强共建“一带一路”同欧亚经济联盟等地区合作倡议和各国发展战略对接合作，推动地区融合发展，为实现地区长治久安和各国发展繁荣发挥了不可替代的作用。
Second, we have stayed committed to advancing the security and development interests of SCO member states. Stability and development are the common pursuit of countries in our region. China and Russia have worked with other member states to deepen all-round cooperation in political, security, economic and cultural fields, make effective responses to new security threats and challenges, and seek greater complementarity between the BRI, the EAEU and other regional cooperation initiatives, and the development strategies of individual countries in pursuit of integrated development of our region. All these efforts have made the SCO irreplaceable for the lasting peace and stability of the whole region and the development and prosperity of individual countries.
三是始终着眼提升上海合作组织国际影响。上海合作组织是欧亚地区重要的建设性力量。中俄双方携手其他成员国，广泛参与国际和地区事务，维护国际公平正义，支持建设开放型世界经济，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
Third, we have stayed committed to raising the global profile of the SCO. Our Organization is an important and constructive force in Eurasia. China and Russia, together with other member states, have engaged extensively in regional and international affairs, upheld international fairness and justice, supported the building of an open world economy, and promoted a fairer and more equitable international order.
上海合作组织顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，具有强大生命力和广阔发展前景。去年青岛峰会上，各方共同描绘了上海合作组织进入历史新阶段的发展蓝图。今年比什凯克峰会是上海合作组织发展的新起点。中方愿同俄方等成员国一道努力，深化团结互信和各领域合作，推动上海合作组织得到更大发展，为国际形势注入更多稳定性和正能量，为构建人类命运共同体作出“上合贡献”。
The SCO, responsive to the call of our times for peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit, enjoys strong vitality and a bright prospect. At last year's Qingdao Summit, we together drew up a blueprint for a new phase in the SCO development. The upcoming Bishkek Summit will therefore become a new starting point in the development of the Organization. China will work with Russia and other member states to enhance unity, mutual trust and cooperation in various areas so that our Organization will keep developing to add more stability and positive energy to the world and make unique contribution to the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：您如何评价您同普京总统的个人友谊？
Q6. How would you describe your personal friendship with President Putin?
答：2013年以来，我和普京总统在双边和多边场合会晤近30次，多次通电话和互致信函。我经常愉快地回忆起我同普京总统的每一次交往。我们就最广泛的议题深入交流，既包括国际形势、双边关系、治国理政等重大问题，也涉及文学、艺术、运动等轻松愉快的话题。我们共同乘坐高铁交流，一同观看中俄青少年冰球友谊赛，在巴厘岛庆祝生日，在对方国家重要节日时通电话或致信函相互祝贺，我们还都被对方国家授予最高国家荣誉勋章……普京总统是我交往最密切的外国同事，是我最好的知心朋友，我十分珍视同普京总统这份深厚的情谊。
Xi: Since 2013, President Putin and I have met nearly 30 times on bilateral and multilateral occasions, and talked on the phone and written to each other many times. I keep fond memories of each interaction I had with President Putin. We have had in-depth and most wide-ranging exchanges on both major issues like the international situation, bilateral ties and governance, and more light-hearted topics like literature, art and sports. We have taken a high-speed train ride together, watched an ice hockey friendly between Chinese and Russian youth teams, celebrated his birthday in Bali, exchanged phone calls and congratulatory messages on each other's important festivals, and been awarded medals of the highest honor by each other's countries. I have had closer interactions with President Putin than with any other foreign colleagues. He is my best and bosom friend. I cherish dearly our deep friendship.我和普京总统的相处，建立在高度互信基础上，这是我们真挚友谊的坚实基础。我们相互尊重、坦诚相待，彼此理解、相互信任。我们对当前世界大势看法相近，在治理国家方面理念相通，肩负两国各自发展振兴的历史责任。最重要的是，我们对中俄关系的战略意义有高度一致的认识，对推动两国关系持续深入发展怀有共同的决心和愿望。我愿同普京总统保持密切交往，共同引领两国关系迈向更高水平，为中国和俄罗斯这两个伟大国家发展繁荣，为两国人民幸福安宁不懈努力。
My engagement with President Putin is built on a high degree of mutual trust. That is the solid foundation of our close friendship. We treat each other with respect, candor, understanding and trust. We share similar views on the international landscape and approaches to national governance, and we both shoulder historical responsibilities for national development and rejuvenation. Most importantly, we share a high degree of consensus on the strategic significance of the China-Russia relationship and therefore the same resolve and desire to deepen and sustain its growth. I look forward to continued close interactions with President Putin. Together, we will take our bilateral ties to new heights and work tirelessly for the development and prosperity of our two great nations and for the happy lives of our peoples.
问：叙利亚局势正趋于稳定。叙利亚政府多次声明愿同有关各方开展合作，尽快重建战争期间受损的基础设施。中方是否有意参与叙利亚重建？近来，委内瑞拉局势持续激化。中方如何评价委内瑞拉局势？美国和伊朗政治对抗持续加剧，波斯湾局势愈演愈烈，中方对解决伊朗核问题的前景如何看待？
Q7. The situation in Syria is stabilizing. The Syrian government has repeated on many occasions that it is ready to work with all relevant parties and restore its war-ravaged infrastructure as soon as possible. Does China intend to take part in Syria's reconstruction? In Venezuela, the situation has flared up lately. What is China's assessment? In addition, the deepening political confrontation between the US and Iran is leading to rising tensions in the Persian Gulf. How does China see the prospects for resolving the Iranian nuclear issue?
答：叙利亚是历史悠久的文明古国，也是中东地区重要国家。近年来，叙利亚局势持续动荡，基础设施遭到严重破坏，人民遭受了深重苦难，我们对此深感痛心。当前，叙利亚局势逐渐好转，政治解决进程向前推进，叙利亚政府和人民也在着手重建家园。中叙两国人民传统友好，中方愿在力所能及的范围内参与叙利亚重建，努力帮助叙利亚人民早日恢复正常生产生活。
Xi: Syria is a time-honored civilization and an important country in the Middle East. It is heart-wrenching for us to see Syria caught in protracted turbulence that has wreaked havoc on its infrastructure and inflicted untold sufferings to its people. Fortunately, the situation there is improving, as the process of political settlement is making progress and the Syrian government and people are starting to rebuild their nation. The Chinese and Syrian people have long enjoyed a traditional friendship. As such, China stands ready to take part in Syria's reconstruction to the best of its capacity and help the Syrian people regain their normal life and work at an early day.
在委内瑞拉问题上，中方的立场是一贯和明确的。我们始终从维护联合国宪章和国际关系基本准则出发，坚持有关问题应该由委内瑞拉朝野在宪法框架内通过包容性政治对话自主协商解决，反对外部干涉和单边制裁，反对使用武力或以武力相威胁。中方愿同国际社会一道，在委内瑞拉问题上发挥积极建设性作用，多作劝和促谈努力，共同维护国际公平正义，维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护地区和平稳定，帮助委内瑞拉早日重回正常发展轨道。
On Venezuela, China's position is consistent and clear. Bearing in mind the importance of upholding the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations, China maintains that the issue should be left to the government and opposition of Venezuela to resolve through inclusive political dialogue and independent consultation within the constitutional framework. China opposes external intervention, unilateral sanctions, and the use or threat of force. China will work with the rest of the international community to play a positive and constructive role on this issue, do more to facilitate talks for peace, and uphold international equity and justice, the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, and regional peace and stability to help Venezuela return to the track of normal development as soon as possible.
近期，由于美国对伊朗进行“极限施压”和单边制裁，伊朗核问题乃至整个中东局势持续紧张升级，形势发展令人担忧。伊朗核问题全面协议是多边主义的结晶，对国际核不扩散体系及中东地区和平稳定至关重要，应该得到尊重和完整、有效执行。中俄两国在伊朗核问题上看法和立场高度一致，都希望有关各方保持理性和克制，加强对话协商，为当前紧张局势降温。中俄双方将保持密切协作，推动相关形势朝着好的方向发展，维护联合国权威，维护国际和平和安全，维护国际社会共同利益。中方也会继续坚定维护自身正当合法权益。
With the US imposing maximum pressure and unilateral sanctions on Iran in recent months, tensions have been escalating surrounding the Iranian nuclear issue, and for that matter, in the entire Middle East. Such developments are indeed a cause for concern. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as the embodiment of multilateralism, is crucial for the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and for peace and stability in the Middle East. It must be respected and implemented effectively in its entirety. China and Russia have highly aligned views and positions on the Iranian nuclear issue with both countries calling on all relevant parties to act with reason and restraint and increase dialogue and consultation to deescalate the tensions. China and Russia will stay in close coordination to push for positive developments while upholding the authority of the UN, peace and security in the world, and the common interests of the international community. Besides, China will continue to stand firm for its own legitimate rights and interests in this process.