137. 习近平接受土库曼斯坦、俄罗斯、哈萨克斯坦、乌兹别克斯坦、吉尔吉斯斯坦五国媒体联合采访
问：您如何评价土库曼斯坦同中国的关系，特别是两国能源合作？您期待这次访问将取得哪些成果？	
1. How would you evaluate Turkmenistan' s relationship with China, in particular the energy cooperation between the two countries? What outcomes do you expect to achieve from this visit?
答：中土友好关系源远流长，古丝绸之路上的商贸和文化交流为两国传统友谊奠定了深厚基础。中土1992年建交以来，双边关系获得长足发展。双边贸易额去年创下103亿美元的新纪录，7年内增长100多倍。双方在联合国和中亚事务中保持密切沟通和协调，有力维护了两国共同战略利益。中方对中土关系取得的成绩感到满意。	
The friendly relationship between China and Turkmenistan dates back a long time. The commercial and cultural exchanges along the ancient Silk Road have laid a solid foundation for the traditional friendship between the two countries. Since the establishment of diplomatic ties in 1992, bilateral relations have come a long way. Last year, two-way trade reached a new record of US$10.3 billion, registering a growth of over 100 folds in seven years. The two sides have maintained close communication and coordination in the United Nations and on Central Asian affairs and firmly upheld their common strategic interests. China is satisfied with the achievements in its relations with Turkmenistan.
能源合作是中土关系的亮点，充分体现了两国政治互信的高水平。两国成功实施了天然气贸易、中国－中亚天然气管道建设等重大合作项目。目前，中国－中亚天然气管道已经同中国境内的西气东输二线相连接，成为当今世界最长的天然气管道。产自中亚腹地土库曼斯坦的天然气跨越千山万水，行程8000多公里直抵太平洋沿岸，这是世界能源合作的典范和中土人民友谊的结晶。	
Energy cooperation is a highlight in China-Turkmenistan relations, which fully testifies to the high level of political mutual trust between the two sides. The two countries successfully carried out major cooperation projects such as trade in natural gas and construction of the China-Central Asia gas pipeline. The China-Central Asia gas pipeline is now linked up with the second line of China's west-to-east gas transmission project. Together, they form the longest natural gas pipeline in the world. The natural gas from Turkmenistan at the heart of Central Asia could now be transferred through a distance of over 8,000 kilometers, crossing mountains and rivers, to reach the Pacific coast. It is a fine example of international energy cooperation and an epitome of the friendship between the Chinese and Turkmenistan people.
中国和土库曼斯坦分别是世界重要能源消费国和重要能源生产国，双方开展能源合作具有天然优势和巨大潜力。中方愿意同土方继续本着平等互利、合作共赢原则，扩大现有管道建设和天然气贸易，启动勘探、开采、油气化工等全方位合作，做长期、稳定、可靠的能源战略伙伴。	
China, a major energy consumer, and Turkmenistan, a major energy producer, enjoy a natural advantage and huge potential in energy cooperation. China is ready to expand the current pipeline construction and natural gas trade with Turkmenistan in line with the principle of equality, mutual benefit and win-win cooperation. The two sides may launch all-dimensional cooperation, including in areas of exploration, development and oil and gas chemical industry, and be each other' s long-term, stable and reliable strategic partners in the energy field.
当前，中国人民正在为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗，土库曼斯坦人民也在积极建设“强盛幸福”时代，双方各自的国家发展战略高度契合。	
Now, the Chinese people are working hard to realize the Chinese dream of the great renewal of the Chinese nation, and the Turkmenistan people are striving to bring about an epoch of power and happiness. This makes the development strategies of the two sides all the more compatible.
我期待着访问土库曼斯坦期间同别尔德穆哈梅多夫总统就规划双边关系第三个10年发展、统筹两国发展战略、实现共同繁荣深入交换意见，并作出重要决定。我相信，通过这次访问，双方能够实现提高中土关系整体水平、推动大型项目和重点领域合作、传播中土世代友好理念的预期目标，为中土关系发展注入新的强大动力。	
I am looking forward to the visit during which I will have in-depth exchange of views and jointly make some important decisions with President Berdymukhamedov on how to plan for the third decade of bilateral relations and how to coordinate development strategies of the two sides and realize common prosperity. I am confident this visit will achieve the goal of lifting the overall bilateral relationship, facilitating large projects and cooperation in priority areas and promoting lasting friendship from generation to generation, so as to inject a strong impetus into the relationship between the two sides.
问：中方怎么看目前中国经济增长有所放缓？中国经济前景如何？中国是否会推出稳定经济增长的新措施？	
2. How does China view its current economic slowdown? What are the future prospects of China' s economy? Will China adopt any new measures to stabilize economic growth?
答：中国经济基本面良好，今年上半年中国国内生产总值增长7.6%，与其他国家相比，经济增长处于高水平。如果我们继续以往的发展方式，我们会有更高的增长率。但是，在宏观经济政策选择上，我们坚定不移推进经济结构调整，推进经济转型升级，宁可主动将增长速度降下来一些，也要从根本上解决经济长远发展问题。因此，这样的增长速度，是良性调整的结果。	
The fundamentals of the Chinese economy are sound. In the first half of this year, China' s GDP grew by 7.6%, which was relatively high compared with other countries. In fact, the growth rate could have been higher had we continued with the past development model. However, we have chosen to implement a macro economic policy under which we will press ahead with the adjustment of economic structure in order to transform and upgrade the economy. We would rather bring down the growth rate to a certain extent in order to solve the fundamental problems hindering our economic development in the long run. In this sense, such a growth rate is the result of sound adjustment.
具体说来，在7.6个百分点的增长中，内需贡献了7.5个点，经常账户盈余已经处于国际公认的合理区间。同时，我们注重完善社会保障政策，稳定和扩大就业，上半年实现了725万人就业。我们确实面临地方政府债务、部分行业产能过剩等困难，但这些问题都处于可控范围之内，我们有能力处理好。	
In specific terms, domestic demand accounted for 7.5 percentage points in the 7.6% growth rate, and our current account surplus is now within the internationally recognized reasonable range. We have focused on improving our social security policy and stabilized and expanded employment, providing 7.25 million new jobs in the first half of this year. We are indeed confronted with difficulties such as local government debt and overcapacity in some industries, but the problems are well within control and could be handled properly.
中国是世界第二大经济体，中国经济同世界经济高度融合。中国经济发展为世界经济复苏作出了重要贡献。对世界经济而言，一个经济运行更稳健、增长质量更高、增长前景更可持续的中国显然是利好的。我们有条件实现经济持续健康发展，为各国创造更广阔市场和发展空间，为世界经济带来更多正面外溢效应。	
China's economy, the second largest in the world, is highly integrated with the world economy. China's economic development has contributed significantly to world economic recovery. A China that enjoys more stable economic performance, higher quality of growth and better prospect of sustainable growth undoubtedly bodes well for the world economy. We have the conditions to realize sustained and sound economic development, which will expand market and development space for other countries and generate more positive spillover effect for the global economy.
问：二十国集团领导人圣彼得堡峰会期间您将同普京总统举行双边会晤，您对这次会晤有何期待？您如何评价俄罗斯为举办这次二十国集团领导人峰会所做的工作？	
3. You will have a bilateral meeting with President Putin on the sidelines of the G20 St Petersburg Summit. What expectations do you have for this summit? How do you see the work Russia has done in hosting the summit? 
答：我十分期待同我的老朋友普京总统在圣彼得堡举行会晤。我今年3月访问俄罗斯时讲过，希望双方把握美好的早春时节，为两国关系发展、为世界和平与发展辛勤耕耘，收获新的成果。	
I am very much looking forward to meeting my old friend President Putin in St Petersburg. As I said during my visit to Russia last March, I hope the two sides will seize the opportune time of early spring to plough and hoe and reap a bumper harvest not only for our bilateral relations but also for peace and development in the world.
令人高兴的是，双方积极落实我同普京总统在莫斯科达成的各项合作共识和协议，推动两国经贸、投资、能源、执法和战略安全、军事军技、地方、人文、国际等各领域合作都取得重要成果或积极进展。	
It is heartening to note that both sides are working hard to implement the cooperation consensus and agreements President Putin and I reached in Moscow, and bilateral cooperation in a wide range of areas, from economy, trade, investment, energy and law enforcement, to strategic and security matters, military-to-military relations, defense technology, local exchanges, culture and international affairs, has yielded important results or made positive progress.
这次我同普京总统的会晤，恰逢金秋收获季节。春华秋实，我们将共同总结今年3月会晤以来两国关系发展取得的成果，规划下一阶段双方各领域合作发展方向和目标，见证两国有关部门和企业签署一系列新的合作文件。	
This time, my meeting with President Putin will take place in autumn - the golden season of harvest. What has been sowed in spring will be turned into rich fruits this autumn. Together, we will review the progress in bilateral ties since our March meeting, set the direction and targets for cooperation in various areas in the next stage, and witness the signing of many new cooperation documents between relevant departments and companies.
我相信，双方将以这次会晤为契机，继续发挥中俄高水平政治关系优势，全面深化各领域务实合作，密切在国际事务中的协调和配合，把两国关系发展得更好，推动两国发展振兴。	
I am sure that both sides will use the upcoming summit meeting as an opportunity to further capitalize on the high-level political relationship between our two countries, deepen practical cooperation across the board, intensify coordination and collaboration in international affairs, and take China-Russia relations to the next level to facilitate development efforts in both countries.
作为今年二十国集团主席国，俄罗斯积极协调各成员，加强二十国集团作用，促进世界经济复苏，为举办这次峰会做了大量卓有成效的工作，充分展现了大国作用和影响，中方予以高度评价。	
As the holder of this year's G20 presidency, Russia has made robust efforts to coordinate among members, strengthen the role of the G20 and promote world economic recovery. It has done a great deal of effective work in preparation for the G20 summit, fully demonstrating the role and impact of a major global player. China highly commends Russia's effort.
中方全力支持俄方办好这次峰会。相信在俄方主持下，在各方一道努力下，圣彼得堡峰会一定会取得积极成果，成为二十国集团发展进程中的重要一环，为二十国集团合作聚共识，为全球经济治理谋思路，为世界经济增长添动力。	
China pledges its full support to Russia's efforts to host a successful summit. We believe that under Russia's stewardship and with the efforts of all parties, the forthcoming St Petersburg summit will deliver positive results. By building consensus for G20 cooperation, putting forward ideas for global economic governance, and stimulating growth momentum for the world economy, the summit will serve as an important link in the course of G20's development.
问：二十国集团领导人第八次峰会即将在俄罗斯圣彼得堡举行，中方对这次峰会有何期待？	
4. The Eighth G20 Leaders' Summit will soon be held in St Petersburg, Russia. What does China expect from the summit?
答：二十国集团领导人圣彼得堡峰会即将举行。这是在世界经济增长动力不足、国际金融危机深层次影响不断显现的背景下，世界主要经济体领导人举行的一次重要会议。中方支持圣彼得堡峰会以增长和就业为主题，推动二十国集团建立更加紧密的伙伴关系，加强宏观经济政策协调，共同开创世界经济更加美好的未来。	
The G20 Leaders' Summit will soon take place in St Petersburg. At a time when world economic growth lacks momentum and the deep-seated impact of the international financial crisis goes on unabated, it will be an important meeting among leaders of the world's major economies. China supports the St Petersburg summit to focus on growth and employment to promote even closer partnerships among G20 members, strengthen their macro-economic policy coordination and jointly usher in a brighter future for the world economy.
第一，共同采取负责任的宏观经济政策。首先是办好自己的事，确保本国经济不出大问题，并通过积极的结构改革增强经济竞争力。在此基础上，各方要加强政策协调，相互带来正面而非负面的外溢效应，共同应对当前世界经济金融领域重大风险和挑战。	
First, G20 members should adopt responsible macro-economic policies. It is important that each country should, first and foremost, manage its own affairs well, keep its own economic house in order, and enhance economic competitiveness through vigorous structural reforms. On the basis of this, parties should step up policy coordination, make sure that the spillover effect of their policies are positive, not otherwise, and work together to meet the major risks and challenges in the international economic and financial fields.
第二，维护和发展更加开放的世界经济。各国要旗帜鲜明反对各种形式的保护主义，推动多哈回合谈判达成早期收获，维护自由、开放、非歧视的多边贸易体系。推动各国经济加深融合，共同建设全球价值链，避免造成全球市场分割和贸易体系分化，实现互利共赢发展。	
Second, the G20 should uphold and promote greater openness in the world economy. Countries should categorically oppose protectionism of all forms, promote an early harvest of the Doha Round negotiations, and safeguard a free, open and non-discriminatory multilateral trading regime. Efforts should be made to deepen economic integration among countries, build a global value chain, and avoid fragmentation of markets and trading systems. This will contribute to win-win development of all countries.
第三，完善全球经济治理。二十国集团要继续致力于提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权，特别是要尽快落实国际货币基金组织份额和治理改革方案，并按时于2014年1月完成国际货币基金组织份额公式调整和新一轮份额总检查，如期于2015年审议特别提款权货币篮子组成。	
Third, the G20 should work to improve global economic governance. It should continue to increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries. In particular, it should speedily implement the quota and governance reform plans for the IMF, complete on time IMF's quota formula adjustment and the next round of general quotas review by January 2014, and review the basket of currencies for special drawing rights as scheduled for 2015.
第四，做发展中国家的发展伙伴。二十国集团要充分发挥自身优势，在推动解决全球发展问题上体现更强的政治意愿，建设更加有效的全球发展伙伴关系，调动更多经济资源，破解更多发展难题。	
Fourth, the G20 should strive to be a development partner for developing countries. It should fully harness its own advantage and demonstrate greater political commitment to pushing for solutions to global development issues. It should forge more effective global partnerships on development, and mobilize more economic resources to tackle a greater number of development challenges.
问：二十国集团领导人峰会为何能在应对国际金融危机中发挥重要作用？同当前其他国际经济合作机制相比，二十国集团有何特点？中方如何看待二十国集团在当今世界的作用？
5. What has made it possible for the G20 Leaders' Summit to play an important role in tackling the international financial crisis? How is the G20 different from other mechanisms for international economic cooperation? What is China's view on G20's role in the present-day world?
答：二十国集团成员既有发达国家，也有新兴市场国家，各成员一起协商，体现了世界经济格局变化和国际经济关系发展大趋势。
The G20 consists of both developed countries and emerging economies. It operates on consensus and reflects the changing world economic landscape as well as shifts in international economic relations.
2008年国际金融危机发生后，二十国集团确立了其作为“国际经济合作主要论坛”的定位，推动国际社会加强宏观经济政策协调，出台一系列重大举措，推动世界经济逐步走出国际金融危机的阴影。同时，二十国集团积极推动国际货币基金组织份额和世界银行投票权改革，成立更具代表性的金融稳定理事会，支持世界贸易组织在多边贸易体系中发挥核心作用，为完善全球经济治理作出了重要贡献。	
After the outbreak of the international financial crisis in 2008, the G20 was defined as the premier forum for international economic cooperation. As such, it has encouraged greater international coordination on macro-economic policies. It has taken a number of major steps, and gradually lifted the world economy out of the shadow of the financial crisis. In addition, it has promoted quota reform at the IMF and voting rights reform at the World Bank, established the more representative Financial Stability Board, and supported the WTO in playing a central role in the multilateral trading regime. By doing so, it has made important contribution to the improvement of global economic governance.
当前，二十国集团正从危机应对向长效经济治理机制转型。只要各成员继续坚持同舟共济、互利共赢的伙伴精神，坚定不移加强宏观经济政策协调、完善全球经济治理、改革国际金融体系、促进全球贸易自由化，二十国集团的前景就一定是光明的。	
Right now, the G20 is in a transition from a crisis-management mechanism to one that is dedicated to long-term economic governance. If its members continue to follow the spirit of solidarity and win-win partnership, and take firm steps to strengthen macro-economic policy coordination, improve global economic governance, reform the international financial system, and promote global trade liberalization, the G20 will definitely embrace a bright future.
问：您如何评价当前哈中关系发展水平？对两国关系未来发展有何期待？两国如何实现到2015年双边贸易额提高至400亿美元的目标，在非资源领域又将如何开展合作？作为全面战略伙伴，您对哈中在国际和地区事务中的合作有哪些看法和建议？	
6. How do you evaluate the current relationship between China and Kazakhstan, and what are your expectations of its future? What could the two countries do to meet the bilateral trade target of US$40 billion by 2015, and how will they engage in cooperation in non-resources sectors? China and Kazakhstan are comprehensive strategic partners. What are your views and suggestions for bilateral cooperation on international and regional issues?
答：中哈是友好邻邦和全面战略伙伴。建交21年来，两国关系保持健康快速稳定发展，双方都将发展同对方关系作为本国外交政策优先方向。可以说，中哈关系正处于历史最高水平，两国全面战略伙伴关系面临前所未有的发展机遇。	
China and Kazakhstan are friendly neighbors and comprehensive strategic partners. Since the establishment of diplomatic ties 21 years ago, bilateral relations have maintained sound, rapid and steady development. Both sides view the relationship with the other as a foreign policy priority. It is fair to say that the relationship is now at its best in history and the comprehensive strategic partnership between the two countries faces unprecedented opportunities for further growth.
不断扩大和深化中哈务实合作，对巩固两国全面战略伙伴关系的物质基础具有重要意义。近年来，两国经贸合作快速发展。中国已经成为哈萨克斯坦第一大贸易伙伴，哈萨克斯坦是中国在独联体地区的第二大贸易伙伴。为进一步提高两国务实合作水平，双方确定了2015年将双边贸易额提升至400亿美元的战略目标。	
Continuous expansion and deepening of China-Kazakhstan practical cooperation is essential to strengthening the material foundation of the comprehensive strategic partnership. Recent years have seen robust growth in bilateral economic cooperation and trade. China is now the largest trading partner of Kazakhstan, and Kazakhstan is China' s second largest trading partner in the CIS region. To further elevate bilateral practical cooperation, the two countries have set the strategic target of raising two-way trade to US$40 billion by 2015.
当然，实现上述目标还要依靠双方一道努力。两国应该继续本着互利双赢原则，在保持油气领域良好合作的基础上，充分挖掘农业、交通运输、高技术、电信、化工等非资源领域合作潜力，同时加强人文、地方等领域交流合作，形成合作结构重点突出、齐头并进的良好局面。相信在双方共同努力下，中哈全方位、多领域的务实合作将不断迈上新台阶，给两国人民带来更多实实在在的利益。	
Admittedly, to achieve these goals requires efforts from both sides. The two countries need to continue to act in the principle of mutual benefit and, while maintaining their sound cooperation in oil and gas, fully tap the cooperation potential in agriculture, transport, hi-tech, telecommunications, chemical engineering and other non-resources areas. At the same time, exchanges and cooperation may be increased between the people and localities of the two countries to put in place a cooperation structure with clear priorities and simultaneous growth across the board. I am confident that with concerted efforts of the two sides, the all-dimensional, wide-ranging and results-oriented cooperation between China and Kazakhstan will be elevated to new heights, bringing more tangible benefits to the two peoples.
中哈同为发展中国家和有影响力的大国，在国际和地区事务中有着相同或相近立场，肩负着维护地区和世界和平、发展、稳定的重任。中哈作为上海合作组织成员国，积极在组织框架内开展合作，共同打击“三股势力”等安全威胁，推动农业、金融、互联互通等方面合作。中方愿同哈方一道努力，为地区和世界和平、稳定、发展作出新的更大的贡献。
Both being developing countries and countries of influence in the world, China and Kazakhstan hold common or similar positions on international and regional affairs and both shoulder the important mission of safeguarding peace, development and stability in the region and beyond. As members of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, China and Kazakhstan have worked actively together within the SCO framework to take on security threats including terrorism, separatism and extremism and advance cooperation in agriculture, finance and connectivity, among others. China will continue to work with Kazakhstan to make new and still bigger contribution to peace, stability and development in the region and the world at large.
问：您如何评价乌兹别克斯坦同中国关系发展状况？您认为乌中在复兴丝绸之路方面可以开展哪些合作？	
7. How do you assess Uzbekistan's relations with China? In what areas could the two countries work together to revive the Silk Road?
答：乌兹别克斯坦是中国的友好近邻和战略伙伴。建交21年来，中乌关系始终保持健康稳定发展势头，各领域合作取得丰硕成果，顺利实施了一大批惠及民生的重大合作项目。2012年，中乌双边贸易额28.75亿美元，是建交初期的50多倍。中国已经成为乌兹别克斯坦第二大贸易伙伴国和第一大投资来源国。中乌战略伙伴关系正在焕发出蓬勃生机和强大活力。中方愿同乌方一道努力，着眼长远和两国关系发展需要，不断推动中乌战略伙伴关系迈上新台阶。	
Uzbekistan is a close and friendly neighbor as well as a strategic partner of China. Over the past 21 years since the establishment of diplomatic relations, China-Uzbekistan relations have maintained sound and steady growth. Fruitful cooperation has been conducted across the board and a large number of major joint projects successfully implemented to the benefit of the people. In 2012, two-way trade reached 2.875 billion U.S. dollars, more than 50 times the figure in the early days of diplomatic relations. China is now Uzbekistan' s second largest trading partner and its biggest source of foreign investment. The China-Uzbekistan strategic partnership is brimming with vigor and vitality. China will, acting in the long-term interests and in keeping with the need of the growth of bilateral relations, work with Uzbekistan to take the strategic partnership to new heights.
中乌两国都拥有悠久历史和璀璨文化。两千多年前，中国和乌兹别克斯坦人民共同开辟了丝绸之路。复兴丝绸之路是我们肩负的共同历史使命。中乌两国可以充分发挥地理毗邻、经济互补、人文历史联系密切等优势，积极开展以下几个方面合作：一是推动互联互通。中方愿同乌方在铁路、公路、航空和过境运输等方面开展合作。二是扩大贸易和投资规模，提升经贸合作质量。中国政府支持更多有实力的中资企业赴乌投资兴业，也欢迎乌兹别克斯坦企业来华发展业务。三是加强人文交往，挖掘旅游合作潜力，积极开展学术交流、团组互访、文艺巡演等方面合作。	
Both China and Uzbekistan boast time-honored history and splendid culture. More than 2,000 years ago, the Chinese and Uzbek people opened the Silk Road together. Today, it is the shared historic mission of both countries to revive the Silk Road. By fully tapping into their geographic proximity, economic complementarity and close cultural, historical and people-to-people ties, the two countries may work actively together in the following areas. First, advance connectivity. China is ready to cooperate with Uzbekistan in rail, road, air and transit transportation, among others. Second, expand trade and investment and raise the quality of business cooperation. The Chinese government will encourage more Chinese companies with a competitive edge to invest in Uzbekistan and welcome Uzbek companies to conduct business in China. Third, boost people-to-people exchanges. We will tap the potential in tourism cooperation, actively exchange academic and other delegations and stage cultural performances in each other's countries.
我相信，在双方共同努力下，形式多样、内涵丰富的现代化丝绸之路必将为两国人民带来更多福祉。	
I am confident that with the joint efforts of the two sides, the modern Silk Road with diverse forms and rich content will definitely bring more benefits to the two peoples.
问：您如何看待吉尔吉斯斯坦同中国关系发展现状及前景？您对这次访问吉尔吉斯斯坦有何期待？	
8. How do you see the current development and prospect of Kyrgyzstan's relations with China? What do you expect to achieve from your visit to Kyrgyzstan? 
答：几天前，吉尔吉斯斯坦刚刚庆祝了独立22周年。借此机会，我谨代表中国政府和人民，对吉尔吉斯人民表示热烈祝贺。祝愿友好的吉尔吉斯斯坦国家繁荣富强、人民幸福安康。	
Kyrgyzstan celebrated the 22nd anniversary of independence just a few days ago. I wish to take this opportunity to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people, warm congratulations to the people of Kyrgyzstan. I wish the friendly country of Kyrgyzstan prosperity and its people happiness.
1992年建交以来，中吉关系始终保持快速稳定发展，各领域合作成果显著，双边关系达到前所未有的高水平，发展前景广阔。双方秉持相互尊重、平等相待、互不干涉内政的原则，彻底解决了历史遗留下来的边界问题，使1100公里的边界线成为联结两国人民友谊和合作的纽带。两国贸易、能源、交通、电信、农业等务实领域合作不断扩大，中国已经成为吉尔吉斯斯坦第二大贸易伙伴国和第二大投资来源国。双方充分尊重对方根据本国国情选择的发展道路，在涉及彼此核心利益的重大问题上相互坚定支持，在遭受国际金融危机和重大自然灾害时同舟共济，是彼此信赖的好邻居、好朋友。	
Since the establishment of diplomatic relations in 1992, China-Kyrgyzstan relations have maintained fast and steady growth. Cooperation in various fields has yielded obvious results and bilateral relations have reached an unprecedented height with bright prospect. The two sides have resolved once and for all the boundary question left over from history in the spirit of mutual respect, equality and non-interference in each other' s internal affairs, making the 1,100 km boundary a bond of friendship and cooperation between the two peoples. Practical cooperation in trade, energy, transport, telecommunications, agriculture and other areas has continued to expand. China is now Kyrgyzstan's second largest trading partner and its second biggest source of foreign investment. The two sides fully respect each other's development path chosen in light of national conditions, firmly support each other on major issues related to their respective core interests and have worked hand in hand in the aftermath of the international financial crisis and major natural disasters. As such, they are indeed each other's trustworthy neighbor and friend.
中国高度重视对吉关系，两国关系面临重大发展机遇。中方愿同吉方一道努力，不断深化政治互信、扩大互利合作、加强战略协作，推动两国关系迈上新的更高的台阶。	
China highly values its relations with Kyrgyzstan and sees major opportunities to further grow this relationship. China is ready to work with Kyrgyzstan to deepen political mutual trust, expand mutually beneficial cooperation, boost strategic coordination and raise the bilateral relationship to a new level.
我期待着对吉尔吉斯斯坦进行国事访问。访问期间，我将同阿坦巴耶夫总统举行正式会谈，共同规划两国关系未来发展，并作出重大决定。	
I am looking forward to my state visit to Kyrgyzstan. During the visit, I will have official talks with President Almazbek Atambayev to jointly map out and make important decisions concerning the future growth of bilateral relations.
我相信，在双方共同努力下，这次访问一定能够取得成功，为中吉两国关系发展注入新的强劲动力。	
I am convinced that with concerted efforts of the two sides, the visit will be a success and will inject fresh and robust dynamism to the growth of China-Kyrgyzstan relations.
问：安全和经济合作是上海合作组织的最主要合作方向。请问您认为上海合作组织下一步应该如何更好履行安全和经济两方面职能？	
9. Cooperation in security and economy represents the principal direction of SCO cooperation. In your view, how should the SCO better perform its security and economic functions?
答：上海合作组织成立12年来，成员国结成紧密的命运共同体和利益共同体。面对复杂的国际和地区形势，维护地区安全稳定和促进成员国共同发展，过去、现在乃至将来相当长时期内都是上海合作组织的首要任务和目标。	
In the past 12 years since the founding of the SCO, member states have forged a close community of common destinies and shared interests. In the face of complex regional and international situation, maintaining regional security and stability and promoting common development of member states has been, is and will continue to be SCO's top priority and objective for quite a long time to come.
安全上，成员国要继续坚定支持彼此维护国家安全和社会稳定的努力，加大打击“三股势力”和毒品犯罪力度。值得注意的是，当前，地区恐怖主义和毒品犯罪相互勾结的现象愈演愈烈，反恐和禁毒成为需要双管齐下的系统工程。中方认为有必要赋予上海合作组织地区反恐怖机构禁毒职能，加强其综合打击“毒恐勾结”的能力。	
On security, member states need to continue to firmly support each other's endeavor to safeguard national security and social stability and intensify efforts to combat terrorism, separatism and extremism and drug-related crimes. What merits caution is that there is a growing tendency of terrorists and drug criminals colluding with each other in the region. Therefore, counter-terrorism and anti-narcotic efforts should be integrated with a two-pronged approach. China believes that there is a need to give the SCO Regional Counter-Terrorism Structure the function of anti-narcotics to enhance its overall ability to fight both terrorism and drug trafficking.
经济上，成员国要大力推动务实合作。我们维护地区安全稳定的最终目的是实现共同发展繁荣。各方有必要加快实施交通、能源、通信、农业等优势领域合作项目，加紧研究建立上海合作组织开发银行，以解决项目融资难题和应对国际金融风险。同时，上海合作组织要不断加强同本地区其他多边机制的务实合作，以实现优势互补。	
On economy, member states need to vigorously promote pragmatic cooperation. The ultimate purpose of maintaining regional security and stability is to achieve common development and prosperity. Parties need to accelerate the implementation of cooperation projects in such advantageous areas as transport, energy, communications and agriculture, and expedite studies on setting up an SCO development bank to resolve project financing difficulties and address international financial risks. Moreover, the SCO needs to step up pragmatic cooperation with other multilateral mechanisms in the region to draw on each other's strengths.
中国始终支持上海合作组织发展。长期以来，我们同成员国积极交流执法安全合作经验。我们为成员国经济合作提供优惠贷款，帮助成员国培养国家建设人才，同成员国同舟共济，共同应对国际金融危机冲击。中方将继续同成员国携手并肩，一道创造上海合作组织的美好明天。	
China has all along supported SCO's development. For a long time, China has actively exchanged experience on law-enforcement and security cooperation with other member states, provided concessional loans for economic cooperation among member states, helped them train professionals for national development, and worked with them to respond to the international financial crisis in a spirit of solidarity. China will continue to join hands with other member states to create a brighter future for the SCO.
问：上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十三次会议即将在比什凯克举行。您对本次峰会有何期待和评价？您在会上将提出哪些倡议？	
10. The 13th Meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of the SCO will soon be held in Bishkek. What are your expectations and assessments of the upcoming summit? What initiatives will you put forth at the summit?
答：上海合作组织成立以来，政治、安全、经济、人文合作和国际合作迈出坚实步伐，为维护本地区安全稳定、促进共同发展发挥了重要作用，显示出勃勃生机。推动上海合作组织更快更好发展，促进共同目标实现，已经成为成员国共识。	
Since its inception, the SCO has taken solid steps in cooperation in political, security, economic, people-to-people and cultural fields and on the international stage. It has played an important role in maintaining regional security and stability and promoting common development, and is now brimming with vigor and vitality. It has become the consensus of member states to facilitate faster and better development of the organization and to promote the attainment of common targets.
上海合作组织比什凯克峰会的举行有两个重要背景。一是国际和地区形势发生新变化。世界经济深度调整，西亚北非局势持续动荡，阿富汗问题面临新的复杂形势，给本地区安全稳定、上海合作组织合作和发展带来新挑战。同时，新兴市场经济体呈现出更为深厚的发展潜力和更为广阔的合作前景，这给上海合作组织发展带来新机遇。二是《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》正式生效，为成员国进一步提高合作水平，增强应对各种威胁和挑战的能力，加快建设持久和平、共同繁荣的地区注入新动力。因此，这次峰会将结合上述形势发展变化，对本组织下一阶段工作作出规划和部署。	
The SCO Bishkek Summit will take place against two important backgrounds. First, there have been new changes in the region and the world. In-depth adjustments in global economy, persistent turmoil in west Asia and north Africa, and new complexities in the Afghanistan issue have all posed new challenges to regional security and stability and to SCO cooperation and development. At the same time, emerging economies have demonstrated greater development potential and broader prospects for cooperation. This has brought new opportunities for SCO's development. Second, the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation Between the SCO Member States, which has officially come into effect, has injected fresh impetus to member states' efforts to elevate cooperation to a higher level, improve their capacity in meeting various threats and challenges, and speed up the building of a region of lasting peace and common prosperity. In this context, the upcoming summit will make plans and arrangements for SCO's work at the next stage in line with the above-mentioned developments and changes.
我认为，推动上海合作组织发展要继续发扬一种精神，即互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”。要搞好两个建设，一是加强自身建设，练好“内功”，提升合作效率和水平；二是加强伙伴网络建设，切实推进同观察员、对话伙伴合作，共谋地区发展大计。要办好三件实事，即《上海合作组织中期发展战略规划》所确定的维护安全、发展经济、改善民生的任务，造福成员国人民。	
I believe that to advance the development of the SCO, it is necessary to continue to carry forward the "Shanghai Spirit" that features mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diverse civilizations and the pursuit of common development. It is important to ensure success in two areas: first, enhance self-development, improve capacity-building, and increase efficiency and level of cooperation; second, strengthen partnership network building, promote cooperation with observers and dialogue partners through concrete steps, and jointly work out regional development plans. Three tasks need to be fulfilled in real earnest, namely, maintaining security, developing the economy and improving people's wellbeing as identified in the Strategic Plan for the Medium-Term Development of the SCO, to the benefit of people of member states.
在本次峰会上，我将就上述问题提出中方看法和倡议，也期待听到同事们的宝贵意见。相信在全体成员国共同努力下，峰会将取得预期成果，为本组织发展揭开崭新篇章。	
At the summit, I will put forth China's views and initiatives on the afore-mentioned matters and I look forward to hearing valuable opinions from colleagues. I am confident that with concerted efforts of all member states, the summit will produce expected results and open a new chapter in the development of the organization.
134. 习近平接受《华尔街日报》书面采访
1. 《华尔街日报》：在您的领导下，中国在推动新的经济和安全安排方面表现得十分活跃，尤其是亚洲基础设施投资银行更是取得明显进展。中国是否正在有意将此前以美国为主的全球治理结构加以调整使其更向中国倾斜？
Under your leadership, China has been active in promoting new economic and security arrangements. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, in particular, has been a notable achievement. Is China trying to rearrange the architecture of global governance, away from the U.S. and toward China?
习近平：全球治理体系是由全球共建共享的，不可能由哪一个国家独自掌握。中国没有这种想法，也不会这样做。中国是现行国际体系的参与者、建设者、贡献者，一直维护以联合国为核心、以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际秩序和国际体系。
XI: The global governance system is built and shared by the world, not monopolized by a single country. China certainly has no intention to do so. China is involved in building the current international system, and has always done its part to uphold the international order and system with the U.N. as its core and the purposes and principles of the U.N. charter as its foundation.
世界上很多有识之士都认为，随着世界不断发展变化，随着人类面临的重大跨国性和全球性挑战日益增多，有必要对全球治理体制机制进行相应的调整改革。这种改革并不是推倒重来，也不是另起炉灶，而是创新完善。“穷则变，变则通。”无论是一个国家，还是世界，都需要与时俱进，这样才能保持活力。推动全球治理体系朝着更加公正合理有效的方向发展，符合世界各国的普遍需求。中美在全球治理领域有着广泛共同利益，应该共同推动完善全球治理体系。这不仅有利于双方发挥各自优势、加强合作，也有利于双方合作推动解决人类面临的重大挑战。
Many visionary people hold that as the global landscape evolves and major transnational and global challenges facing mankind increase, it is necessary to adjust and reform the global governance system and mechanism. Such reform is not about dismantling the existing system and creating a new one to replace it. Rather, it aims to improve the global governance system in an innovative way. We in China have a saying, “When all means are exhausted, changes are necessary; once changes are made, things will improve.” Whether for a country or the entire world, adaptation to keep pace with the times is necessary in order to maintain its vigor. To build a more equitable, just and effective architecture of global governance meets the common aspiration of all countries. China and the U.S. share broad interests in this respect and should work together to improve the global governance system. This will not only leverage our respective strengths to enhance cooperation, but also enable our two countries to jointly respond to major challenges facing mankind.
中国几十年的发展很大程度上得益于国际合作。因此，我们应该为国际发展事业作出贡献，很多发展中国家朋友对中国提出了这方面的强烈愿望。建立亚投行，主要是为满足亚洲地区基础设施建设的需求以及亚洲各国在深化合作方面的愿望。据世行、亚开行测算，2010年到2020年，亚洲地区每年基础设施建设资金缺口达8000亿美元。亚投行可以为这种需求多提供一种资金投入选择，因而受到亚洲国家和国际社会欢迎。面对这么大的需求，亚投行只是一个渠道，不可能包打天下。亚投行是一个开放和包容的多边开发机构，将同现有多边开发银行相互补充。除了域内国家，德国、法国、英国等国家也都加入了亚投行。中方欢迎美国参与亚投行，从一开始我们就是这个态度。
China owes much of its progress in development over the past decades to international cooperation; we thus feel duty-bound to make greater contribution to international development endeavors. Many other developing countries have also expressed similar strong wishes to China. The Asian Infrastructure Development Bank (AIIB) is established mainly as a response to the need of Asian countries for infrastructure development and their aspirations for further cooperation. According to the projection of the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, from 2010 to 2020, the annual shortfall in funding for Asian infrastructural development is around US$800 billion. The AIIB serves as a new option to meet this shortfall, and it is therefore welcomed by both Asian countries and the wider international community. But as the funding shortage is huge, it is clear that the AIIB alone cannot possibly meet such demand. As an open and inclusive multilateral development agency, the AIIB will complement other multilateral development banks. In addition to Asian countries, countries outside Asia such as Germany, France and the U.K. have also joined the AIIB. China welcomes the U.S. to join the AIIB. This has been our position from the very outset.
我不认为世界上哪个国家可以使全球治理结构向自己倾斜，也不认为这样做是符合时代潮流的。全球治理结构如何完善，应该由各国共同来决定。联合国马上就要举行成立70周年系列峰会。中国愿同广大成员国一道，推动建设以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，完善全球治理结构，共同构建人类命运共同体。
I don't believe any country is capable of rearranging the architecture of global governance toward itself. Obviously, such practice goes against the trend of the times. The improvement of global governance architecture should be decided by all countries. As the U.N. summit commemorating the 70th anniversary draws nearer, China stands ready to work with all the other U.N. member states to build a new type of international relationship featuring win-win cooperation, improve the architecture of global governance, and build a community of shared future for mankind.
《华尔街日报》：中国在处理地区和国际事务方面越来越自信，从中东到非洲到朝鲜半岛都是如此。中美在哪些领域利益一致，在哪些领域又存在分歧？中方如何看待最近达成的伊朗核协议？您是否担心朝鲜的核野心？
2. China is playing an increasingly assertive role in regions around the world, from the Middle East to Africa and the Korean peninsula. Where do China's interests align or differ from the U.S.? What's China's view of the recent nuclear deal on Iran? How worried are you about North Korea's nuclear ambitions?
习近平：中国奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，愿意为维护世界和平、促进共同发展作出努力。当今世界，中国不可能独善其身，只有世界好，中国才能好。在推动世界经济复苏、政治解决国际和地区热点、应对各种全球性问题和挑战等方面，中国都没有缺席。这是国际社会的希望，也是中国的责任。
XI:China pursues an independent foreign policy of peace and is committed to world peace and common development. In today's world, it is impossible for China to develop on its own; only when the world thrives can China prosper. China has never been absent in efforts to promote world economic recovery, seek political settlement of international and regional hotspots and respond to various global problems and challenges. This is what the international community expects of China, and to do so is China's responsibility.
中美两国都是联合国安理会常任理事国，肩负着维护世界和地区和平与安全的重要责任，存在广泛共同利益。中方愿同美方携手应对重大全球和地区性问题，己经做了很多事，还将继续做下去。中美在应对朝核、伊朗核、巴以和谈、南苏丹、气候变化、重大传染性疾病等一系列国际和地区问题及全球性挑战方面开展了密切协调和合作。当然，中美在处理一些问题时思路和方法并不完全一致，有不同才能相互补益，找到问题的最佳解决方案。
Both being permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, China and the U.S. shoulder important responsibility of upholding regional and world peace and security, and our interests converge in a broad range of areas. China wishes to join hands with the U.S. to tackle major regional and global issues. As a matter of fact, we have done a great deal together in this area and will continue to do so. For example, China and the U.S. have been engaged in close coordination and cooperation in addressing various regional and international issues as well as global challenges, ranging from the Korean nuclear issue and the Iranian nuclear issue to Palestine-Israel peace talks, South Sudan, climate change and major epidemic diseases. Admittedly, there are differences in our respective thinking on and approach to some issues. However, differences are the reason why we should complement each other and find best solutions to issues.
在处理国际和地区事务时，中国坚持平等、公平、正义，倡导以和为贵，主张通过和平谈判政治解决有关问题。处理国际和地区事务，应该根据事情本身的是非曲直决定立场和政策，说公道话，办公道事。我们不赞成强行干涉别国内政，认为很多事情应该商量着办。不管遇到多么大的困难、多么复杂的情况，国际社会都应该坚定信心，持之以恒坚持和平努力。
In addressing regional and international issues, China adheres to the principles of equality, fairness and justice and calls for seeking political settlement of relevant issues through peaceful negotiation. In addressing these issues, China bases its position and policy on the merit of each particular case and endeavors to uphold justice. China opposes arbitrary interference in other countries' internal affairs and stands for resolving issues through consultation. No matter how difficult and complex the challenges are, the international community should meet them with confidence and strive to resolve them through peaceful means.
伊朗核问题政治解决取得重大成果，中美为此进行了共同努力。这说明我们的主张和方法是有效的。中方将同各方一道，推动全面协议得到有效落实。
The political settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue represents a major achievement of the international community, and China and the U.S. worked hard to make this possible. It shows that our approaches have worked well. Going forward, China will work with all parties involved to ensure the deal is fully implemented.
中方坚持朝鲜半岛无核化的立场是坚定的、明确的，同时我们认为应该通过和平手段实现半岛无核化、维护半岛和平稳定。当前，半岛局势复杂敏感。中方愿同美方及相关各方继续就妥善处理半岛事务、实现东北亚地区长治久安等问题保持密切沟通和协调。
China's position for denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is firm and clear-cut. At the same time, we believe that the denuclearization, peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula should be achieved through peaceful means. The current situation of the Korean Peninsula is intricate and sensitive. China will maintain close communication and coordination with the U.S. and relevant parties to properly address issues relating to the Korean Peninsula and ensure long-term stability of Northeast Asia.
《华尔街日报》：中国梦是您就职后最早提出的概念之一，这个提法现在在中国很流行，同时也让人想起我们在美国常会提到的美国梦。您曾经说过，中国梦是强国梦也是强军梦。您觉得中国梦和美国梦有哪些相似的地方？又有哪些不同的地方？
3. One of the first slogans you raised upon taking office was the “China Dream.” It proved popular at home and has the ring of the “American dream.” In speeches you've given, you've said the “China Dream” is about building a strong nation and strong military. What do you see as the similarities and differences between the “China Dream” and the “American dream”?
习近平：中国梦最根本的是实现中国人民的美好生活。关于这个问题，需要从历史和现实两个向度来认识。1840年鸦片战争之后，中华民族经历了长达一个世纪的社会动荡、外族侵略、战争磨难，但中国人民始终自强不息、顽强斗争，从未放弃对美好梦想的向往和追求。看待当今中国，一定要深刻认识中国近代以后所遭受的民族苦难，一定要深刻认识这种长期的民族苦难给中国人民精神世界带来的深刻影响。所以我们说，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦是近代以来中华民族最伟大的梦想。中国梦是中华民族的梦，也是每个中国人的梦。中国梦不是镜中花、水中月，不是空洞的口号，其最深沉的根基在中国人民心中。
XI: The Chinese dream is fundamentally about making life better for the Chinese people, and I think one should approach this concept from two angles: history and reality. Starting from the Opium War in 1840, the Chinese nation went through a century of social turbulence, foreign aggression and the sufferings of war. Yet throughout all this trying time, our people stood on their feet and struggled tenaciously for a better future. They never gave up the longing for their cherished dream. To understand today's China, one needs to fully appreciate the Chinese nation's deep suffering since modern times and the profound impact of such suffering on the Chinese minds. That is why we regard the Chinese dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation as its greatest dream since modern times. The Chinese dream is as much the dream of every Chinese as it is the dream of the whole nation. It is not an illusion, nor is it an empty slogan. The Chinese dream is deeply rooted in the hearts of the Chinese people.
每个国家、每个民族都有自己的梦想。有梦想才有希望。上次访美时，我在艾奥瓦州马斯卡廷的老朋友们也向我提起他们的梦想。我深深感到，各国人民包括美国人民都对未来有着共同梦想：世界和平，社会安宁，生活富足。当然，由于历史文化、发展阶段的不同，中国梦、美国梦以及其他国家人民的梦想内涵不尽相同，实现的具体途径和方式也可能不完全一样。条条大路通罗马。各国人民对梦想的追求，不论有什么异同，都是激励他们顽强奋斗的强大动力，也为中美合作和各国合作提供了重要机遇。
Every country and every nation has its own dream, and dream brings hope. During my last visit to the United States, my old friends in Muscatine, Iowa, talked to me about their dream. I have the impression that the Americans and people in all other countries share the same dream about the future: world peace, social security and stability, and a decent life. Naturally, owing to differences in history, culture and stage of development, China, the United States and other countries may not have the exact same dream, and they pursue their dreams in different ways. But all roads lead to Rome. The dreams of various peoples, however different in meaning, are sources of inspiration for them, and all these dreams create important opportunities for China and the United States, as well as other countries to engage in cooperation.
《华尔街日报》：中美两国间的关系近年来受到诸多问题的困扰，如南海岛礁建设、网络间谍、美国跨国公司认为在华业务受到不平等待遇等问题。在美国国内一些人甚至提出要对中国采取新的遏制政策。您如何回应这些涉及中国的批评意见？您认为维系中美关系的重要因素是什么？如何能使得两国之间的纽带更加紧密？
4. Relations between the two countries are strained by many issues - from China's island-building in the South China Sea to allegations of cyber-spying and complaints by American businesses of unfair regulations. Some in the U.S. are even calling for a new containment policy against China. How do you answer these critics? What's the glue that holds U.S.-China relations together and how can it be made stronger?
习近平：看待中美关系，要看大局，不能只盯着两国之间的分歧，正所谓“得其大者可以兼其小”。中美两国经济总量占世界三分之一、人口占世界四分之一、贸易总量占世界五分之一。这两个“大块头”不合作，世界会怎样？历史和现实都表明，中美两国合则两利、斗则俱伤。2013 年夏天，我同奥巴马总统在加利福尼亚州安纳伯格庄园举行会晤，作出共同构建中美新型大国关系的战略抉择，其核心内容就是不冲突、不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢。两年多来，围绕这一共识，两国各领域交流合作日益深化，水平不断提升，双方就几乎所有重大国际和地区问题及全球性挑战保持着密切有效的沟通和协调。事实证明，中美两国利益己日趋紧密地联系在一起，两国关系发展不仅造福两国人民，也有力促进了亚太地区和世界和平、稳定、发展。
XI:In approaching China-U.S. relations, one should see the larger picture and not just focus on differences, just as a Chinese saying tells us, “When important things are addressed first, secondary issues will not be difficult to settle.” Together, China and the United States account for one-third of the world economy, one-fourth of the global population, and one-fifth of global trade. If two big countries like ours do not cooperate with each other, just imagine what will happen to the world. Both history and reality show that China and the United States stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation. When President Obama and I met at the Annenberg Estate, California, in the summer of 2013, we made the strategic decision of jointly building a new model of major-country relationship between China and the United States featuring nonconflict or confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation. In the past two years and more since then, guided by this agreement, our exchanges and cooperation across the board have kept deepening and been upgraded. We maintain close and effective dialogue and cooperation on almost all major international and regional issues and global challenges. Facts have shown that the interests of China and the U.S. have grown increasingly intertwined. The growth of the China-U.S. relationship has not only benefited our two peoples, it has also enhanced peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific and beyond.
当然，一个家庭还会有这样那样的矛盾，中美两国难免会存在一些分歧。双方要相互理解、相互尊重、聚同化异，尊重和照顾彼此核心利益和重大关切。对可以解决的问题，双方要相向而行，共同努力加以解决。对一时解决不了的问题，要以建设性方式善加管控，防止激化或升级，防止对两国总体关系和符合两国人民利益的合作大局造成干扰。
Naturally, we have some differences, even family members don't always see eye to eye with each other. Our two countries should understand and respect each other, expand common ground and properly handle differences, and respect and accommodate each other's core interests and major concerns. On issues that can be resolved, the two sides should make joint efforts to seek a solution; as to those issues that cannot be resolved for the time being, we should manage them in a constructive way, make sure that they are not exacerbated or escalated, and prevent them from derailing the overall relationship of the two countries and cooperation that has served our two peoples so well.
南沙群岛自古以来就是中国的领土，我们对此有着充足的历史和法理依据。中国对南沙部分驻守岛礁进行了相关建设和设施维护，不影响也不针对任何国家，不应过度解读。中方岛礁建设主要是为了改善岛上人员工作生活条件，并提供相应国际公共产品服务，也有助于进一步维护南海航行自由和安全。
The Nansha Islands have been China's territory since ancient times. This is fully backed by historical and legal evidence. China's development and maintenance of facilities on some of our garrisoned islands and reefs in the Nansha Islands does not impact on or target any other country, and it should not be overinterpreted. These facilities have been built to improve the working and living conditions of the Chinese personnel on the maritime features, provide international public goods and services, and better uphold navigation freedom and safety in the South China Sea.
中国是网络安全的坚定维护者。中国是黑客攻击的受害国。中国政府不会以任何形式参与、鼓励或支持企业从事窃取商业秘密行为。不论是网络商业窃密，还是对政府网络发起黑客攻击，都是违法犯罪行为，都应该根据法律和相关国际公约予以打击。中美双方在网络安全上有共同关切，我们愿同美方加强合作。
China takes cybersecurity very seriously. China is also a victim of hacking. The Chinese government does not engage in theft of commercial secrets in any form, nor does it encourage or support Chinese companies to engage in such practices in any way. Cybertheft of commercial secrets and hacking attacks against government networks are both illegal; such acts are criminal offenses and should be punished according to law and relevant international conventions. China and the United States share common concerns on cybersecurity. We are ready to strengthen cooperation with the U.S. side on this issue.
我将同奥巴马总统就双边关系和国际形势深入交换意见，并广泛接触美国各界人士，共商进一步发展中美关系大计，希望这次访问能向国际社会发出中美加强合作、共同应对全球性挑战的积极信息。
I will have in-depth exchanges of views with President Obama on bilateral relations and the international developments and engage the American public in order to jointly chart the course for growing China-U.S. relations. I am sure that this visit will send a positive message to the international community that China and the United States will strengthen cooperation and jointly meet global challenges.
《华尔街日报》：中国在亚洲地区军事实力和军事行动的扩张引起了美国政府关注以及部分亚洲国家担忧。您能否给我们解释一下中国的意图？美国及其盟友在亚洲的军事构架是否让中国缺乏安全感？美国政府是否应该做些事情以照顾中国的安全利益？
5. The expansion of China's military power and military operations has caused concern in Washington and unsettled some governments in the region. Please explain China's intentions. Does the U.S. alliance structure in Asia make Beijing feel less secure? Should Washington do more to accommodate Chinese security interests?
习近平：中国历来奉行防御性国防政策和积极防御的军事战略。中国加强国防和军队建设，并不是为了穷兵黯武，我们没有这个想法。在国土之外，中国在亚洲没有任何军事基地，没有任何驻军。中国是一个大国，领土、领海、领空广阔，具有漫长的边界线，需要对国防建设保持一定投入，也需要保持适度规模的军队。为表明中国坚持和平发展的决心，我不久前宣布中国将裁军30万。中国早就承诺永远不搞扩张、永远不称霸。历史已经证明并将继续证明这一点。
XI:China has always pursued a defense policy that is defensive in nature and a military strategy featuring active defense. In strengthening our defense and military building, we are not going after some kind of military adventure. It never crosses our mind. China has no military base in Asia and stations no troops outside its borders. China is a big country that has vast territorial land, sea and airspace and very long borders. We need to maintain proper investment in our defense and keep the troop size at an appropriate level. To demonstrate China's determination to uphold peace and development, I announced not long ago a troop cut by 300,000. China has long pledged never to practice expansionism and seek hegemony. History has and will continue to prove this.
中国是联合国安理会五常中派出维和人员最多的国家，中国军队在亚丁湾护航、打击海盗、参与叙利亚化学武器外运等方面发挥了重要作用。中国军队在周边最多的行动，就是应邀帮助一些国家应对自然灾害。中国军队将在力所能及范围内向国际社会提供更多公共安全产品。
China has contributed more U.N. peacekeepers than any other permanent member of the Security Council. The Chinese military has played important roles in antipiracy escort operation in the Gulf of Aden and in the shipping of chemical weapons out of Syria for destruction. In our neighborhood, China's military has helped many countries to deal with natural disasters. It will do still more within its capacity to provide public security goods to the international community.
中美都是亚太重要国家，亚太是中美利益交织最密集、互动最频繁的地区。中美两国都希望亚太地区保持和平稳定，这符合两国和地区国家共同利益。亚太应该成为中美加强协调和配合的合作社，而不应该成为中美互相角力的角斗场。我们的态度是，凡是有利于地区和平稳定的事，我们都欢迎：凡是可能导致地区冲突和动荡的事，我们都反对。
Both China and the United States are major Asia-Pacific countries, whose interests intersect more closely and interact more frequently than in any other region of the world. Both sides desire to see peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific, as it serves their common interests as well as those of the countries in the region. The Asia-Pacific should be a cooperative ground for enhanced China-U.S. coordination and collaboration rather than their Coliseum for supremacy. Our attitude is this: we welcome whatever that contributes to regional peace and stability, and oppose whatever that may lead to conflict and turmoil in the region.
中美双方应该在亚太地区积极践行互相尊重、合作共赢的理念。中国军队2014年首次参加“环太平洋军演”，中美两军正在推进“两个互信机制”建设，期待中美在亚太地区寻找更多契合点，不断增进战略互信，同地区国家一道，维护地区和平、稳定、繁荣。
In the Asia-Pacific, both China and the United States should vigorously implement the principles of mutual respect and win-win cooperation. China participated in RIMPAC for the first time in 2014. The two militaries are stepping up the two Confidence-Building Mechanisms. We hope to identify still more converging ground in the region for the two countries, continuously build up strategic trust and work with other countries in making the region more peaceful, stable and prosperous.
《华尔街日报》：今年夏天对于中国来说是个“多事之夏”：股市直线下跌，人民币贬值，实体经济发展也在放缓。全球很多投资者都在担心中国经济要比官方数字所显示的更为疲软，他们也想知道中国政府是否能够有效控制局面。您如何解读目前的中国经济状况？目前中国政府正在采取哪些措施以提升国内外投资者的信心？
6. China has had a tumultuous summer, with plummeting stock markets, a devaluation of the renminbi and signs of economic weakness. Many investors around the world wonder if the Chinese economy is weaker than the official figures show and if the government is sufficiently in control. What's your assessment of the economy and what is being done to shore up confidence among Chinese and global investors?
习近平：中国经济增速仍然居世界前列。今年上半年，中国经济增长7%，在世界总体经济形势复杂多变的环境下，这是来之不易的。根据我们设定的发展目标，即到2020年实现国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入比2010年翻一番，保持7%左右的增长速度就可以做到。
XI: China's economic growth is still one of the fastest in the world. In the first half of the year, the Chinese economy grew by 7%, which is hard-won considering the intricacy and changeable nature of the overall global economy. A growth rate of around 7% would be sufficient to reach our goal of doubling the 2010 GOP and per capita income by 2020.
中国经济运行仍然保持在合理区间。中国需要的是提高经济发展质量和效益，解决经济发展中存在的不平衡、不协调、不可持续问题，以利于走得更稳更远。我们正在加快转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构，更加注重创新驱动，更加倚重消费拉动。我们希望通过解决这些问题，使中国经济凤凰涅槃、浴火重生，保持强劲发展动力。
The Chinese economy is still operating within the proper range. What China needs is a higher quality and efficiency of economic development by successfully addressing the problem of unbalanced, uncoordinated and unsustainable development, so that our economy will be put on a more solid basis and go forward more steadily. We are stepping up efforts to shift our growth model, make structural adjustment and place greater emphasis on developing an innovation and consumption-driven economy. It is our hope that by solving these problems, China's economy will transform itself and retain its robust dynamism for development.
在当前世界经济大环境下，各国经济都面临着困难，中国经济也面临着一定下行压力，但这是前进中的问题。我想特别强调，无论发生什么情况，中国都将坚定不移全面深化改革，不断扩大开放。我们将统筹稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险，加强和创新宏观调控，促进经济平稳较快发展。中国新型工业化、信息化、 城镇化、农业现代化持续推进，居民储蓄率高，消费潜力巨大，人民工作勤奋，中等收入者比重在提高，服务业发展势头强劲，市场空间和潜力都很大，今后一个时期保持经济中高速增长有基础也有条件。
Against the overall global economic backdrop, many countries have encountered difficulties. The Chinese economy is also under a downward pressure. But it is a problem in the course of progress. What I want to emphasize, in particular, is that whatever happens, China will stay strongly committed to deepening its reform on all fronts while opening still wider to the outside world. We will work in a coordinated fashion to ensure growth, promote reform, make structural adjustment, improve people's well-being and forestall risks, enhancing and innovating macro-regulation and ensuring steady and fairly rapid economic development. With China steadily promoting a new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization, its household savings rate being so high and consumer spending enjoying a huge potential plus its diligent workforce, its rising middle-income population, its robust service sector and its vast and potential-rich market, China has the capacity and is in the position to maintain a medium-high growth in the years to come.
风物长宜放眼量。分析中国经济，要看这艘大船方向是否正确，动力是否强劲，潜力是否充沛。在大海上航行，再大的船也会有一时的颠簸。只要投资者全面了解中国改革开放以来的经济发展历程、近期中国为促进经济持续稳定增长制定的战略以及中国经济各项数据和趋势，就会作出正确判断。上海美国商会今年发表的报告显示，约95%的受访企业计划加大或维持在华投资。这是300多位美国企业家的选择。我相信，聪明的投资者都会作出同样选择。
To understand China's economy, one needs to take a longer view. If you liken it to a large ship on the sea, the question you ask is whether it is sailing in the right direction, does it have sufficient engine power and energy to stay long. Any ship, however large, may occasionally get unstable sailing on the high sea. Investors will come to a right judgment if they have a full understanding of China's progress in economic development since the start of reform and opening-up, of China's strategies formulated recently to ensure sustained and steady growth, and of the relevant data and trends in China's economic performance. The report released by the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai showed that 95% of the surveyed businesses have planned to increase or maintain their investment in China. That is a decision made by over 300 American entrepreneurs, a decision I believe all smart investors will make.
《华尔街日报》：您任职伊始，就提出了一个雄心勃勃的改革方案，承诺要让市场发挥“决定性”作用。而今夏因股市波动采取的救市措施看起来似乎跟贵国的改革承诺背道而驰。您觉得政府干预救市的必要性有哪些？在未来的几个月乃至更长一段时间中，中国在经济改革方面还有哪些我们值得期待的举措？《人民日报》等一些官方权威媒体都有报道称目前的改革遇到了一些阻力。您觉得阻力来自哪些方面？
7. Early on your leadership laid out an ambitious program for reform, promising to let markets play a “decisive” role. The stock market rescue this summer, however, has raised questions about your leadership's commitment to economic reform. Why did you think it necessary to intervene in the stock markets? What significant economic reforms lay ahead over the coming months and year? People's Daily and other state media have reported on resistance to reform; where does the opposition come from?
习近平：当前，中国经济体制改革的重要方向就是使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用和更好发挥政府作用。简言之，就是“看不见的手”和“看得见的手”都要用好。
XI:An important goal for China's current economic reform is to enable the market to play the decisive role in resource allocation and make the government better play its role. That means we need to make good use of both the invisible hand and the visible hand.
股市涨跌有其自身的运行规律，一般情况下政府不干预。政府的职责是维护公开、公平、公正的市场秩序，保护投资者特别是中小投资者的合法权益，促进股市长期稳定发展，防止发生大面积恐慌。前段时间，中国股市出现了异常波动，这主要是由于前期上涨过高过快以及国际市场大幅波动等因素引起的。为避免发生系统性风险，中国政府采取了一些措施，遏制了股市的恐慌情绪，避免了一次系统性风险。境外成熟市场也采取过类似做法。在综合采取多种稳定措施后，市场已经进入自我修复和自我调节阶段。发展资本市场是中国的改革方向，不会因为这次股市波动而改变。
The ups and downs of stock markets are caused by the very nature of such markets, and the government normally does not intervene. The role of the government is to maintain an open, fair and impartial market order, protect the lawful rights and interests of investors, especially small- and medium-scale investors, promote the stable growth of the stock market in the long run, and defuse massive panic. The recent unusual fluctuations in the Chinese stock market were mainly the result of previous rapid surges and big fluctuations in the international market. The Chinese government has taken some measures to defuse systemic risks. Such steps have proved successful. As a matter of fact, similar steps have also been taken in some mature foreign markets. Thanks to a mix of stabilizing steps taken, the market has entered a stage of self-correction and adjustment. To develop the capital market is a key goal of China's reform, which will not change just because of current market fluctuations.
2014年，我们蹄疾步稳推进各项改革，80个重点改革任务基本完成，此外有关部门还完成了108个改革任务，各方面共出台370条改革成果。今年以来，我们已经推出了70多个重点改革方案。9月15日，我们讨论通过了实行市场准入负面清单制度、支持沿边重点地区开发开放若干政策措施、加快完善价格机制、鼓励和规范国有企业投资项目引入非国有资本等改革方案。我们今年确定了100多项重点改革，还要继续出台一批重大经济改革举措，把有利于稳增长、调结构、惠民生、防风险的改革举措往前排，将在财税、金融、开放、司法、民生等领域集中推出一些力度大、措施实的改革方案。
In 2014, we advanced reform in various areas in a fast yet steady manner, and 80 major reform tasks were basically completed. On top of that, the relevant government departments completed 108 reform tasks, with 370 reform outcomes delivered in various sectors. Since the beginning of this year, we have introduced over 70 major reform plans. On Sept. 15, we discussed and adopted a number of reform plans, including the implementation of a system of negative list on market access, policies to support the development and opening-up of key border regions, a decision to accelerate the improvement of the pricing mechanism, and a plan to encourage the injection of non-state capital in investment projects launched by state-owned enterprises in accordance with due procedures. This year, we have decided to launch over 100 key reform steps, and more major economic reform steps will be introduced. Those items of reform that facilitate growth, structural adjustment, people's well-being and risk prevention will be prioritized. And substantive reform plans will be vigorously implemented in such areas as fiscal policy and taxation, finance, opening-up, the judiciary and people's well-being.
中国这一轮改革是全面改革，力度之大前所未有，经过努力，一些多年来难啃的硬骨头啃下来了。改革必然会触及一些人的既得利益，改变一些人的工作和生活状态，当然会有难度，不然就不叫改革了。所以，我说过，改革要敢于啃硬骨头、敢于涉险滩，改革关头勇者胜。同时，改革要扎扎实实干，想入非非不行，哗众取宠不行，蜻蜓点水也不行。开弓没有回头箭，我们将继续坚定不移实现改革目标，风雨无阻，勇往直前。
This round of reform in China is comprehensive in nature and it is being pursued with unprecedented intensity. We have made enormous efforts and managed to overcome some long-standing obstacles. These reform steps have upset the vested interests of some people, and caused changes to the career and life of some people. It is only natural that there will be difficulties. Otherwise it will not be a reform. That is why I said that we must be bold enough to crack hard nuts and ford dangerous rapids during reform and that only the daring will prevail at key stages of reform. At the same time, reform calls for down-to-earth efforts. To set unrealistic expectations, play to public opinion by talking big or just scratch the surface will not work. Like an arrow shot that cannot be brought back, we will forge ahead against all odds to meet our goals of reform.
《华尔街日报》：中国政府正在就人民币纳入国际货币基金组织储备货币篮子同国际货币基金组织进行讨论。今年8月人民币汇率的贬值也被看作是迈向更为灵活汇率形成机制的重要举措，但此举同时也吓坏了全球市场。中国是否会完全放开资本账户，使人民币成为能够自由兑换的货币？您是否担心中国外汇储备的下降以及资本外逃？
8. Your government is engaged with the International Monetary Fund to have the RMB included in the official basket of reserve currencies. The devaluation in August was seen as a step toward a more flexible exchange rate, but also spooked global markets. Will China fully open its capital account to make the yuan a free convertible currency? How concerned are you about declines in China's foreign currency reserves and capital flight?
习近平：中国一直在完善人民币汇率市场化形成机制。这次完善人民币汇率中间价报价就是其中一步，加大了市场决定汇率的力度。当前，国际经济金融形势复杂，做市商对人民币汇率走势预期明显分化，使得人民币汇率中间价和市场汇率出现了较长时间的偏离。完善中间价报价使中间价形成更加参考外汇市场供求关系，从机制上防止中间价和市场汇率持续大幅偏离。8月11日中间价报价完善以来，偏差矫正己初见成效。从国际国内经济金融形势看，人民币汇率不存在持续贬值的基础。人民币汇率形成机制改革会继续朝更加市场化的方向迈进。
XI:China has been working to improve market-based RMB exchange rate regime. Recent measures to improve the quotation of the RMB central parity is a case in point, as it gives greater say to the market in deciding the exchange rate. Given the complexities in the current international economic scene and financial market and the apparent divergence in market makers' expectations of the future trend of the RMB exchange rate, there had been a long-standing gap between the central parity and market exchange rate of the RMB. With improvements to the quotation of the RMB central parity, the RMB central parity will better respond to supply and demand in the foreign exchange markets, and systemically avert the sustained large gap between the RMB central parity and market exchange rate. Since the quotation of RMB central parity was improved on Aug. 11, initial progress has been made in correcting the deviation. Given the current economic and financial conditions at home and abroad, there is no basis for sustained depreciation of the RMB. Reform of the RMB exchange rate formation regime will continue in the direction of market operation.
中国早在上世纪90年代初期就提出了实现资本项目可兑换的目标。20多年来，中国一直在朝着资本项目可兑换方向努力。目前，人民币资本项目完全不开放的交易已经不多，中国正在稳步有序向前推进人民币资本项目可兑换相关工作。
China put forward the goal of convertibility of the RMB under the capital account back in the early 1990s. Over the past 20 years and more, China has been working toward this goal. Currently, there are only very few transactions that are still banned under the RMB capital account. China is advancing the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account in a steady and orderly manner.
近期，中国外汇储备余额下降，主要反映了境内银行、企业、个人等本外币资产负债结构的优化调整。主要有三个原因：一是部分外汇资产由央行转向境内银行、企业等机构及个人持有，如今年前8个月境内银行各项外汇存款余额增加569亿美元，其中8月份增加270亿美元。二是境内企业“走出去”对外投资增长较快。三是境内企业等市场主体稳步减少境外融资，有助于降低高杠杆经营、货币错配等风险。这些变化都属于正常的资本流动，在适度可控的范围内。真正以长期投资为目的的外方投资者仍在进入中国。中国外汇储备依然充裕，在世界范围内仍属于很高水平。随着人民币汇率形成机制不断完善以及人民币国际化推进，中国外汇储备有所增减是正常的，不必过分担忧。
There has been a recent drop in China's foreign reserves. This actually reflects improvement to the mix of local currency as well as foreign exchange assets and liabilities of domestic banks, enterprises and individuals. There are three main reasons: First, some assets in foreign exchanges were transferred from the central bank to domestic banks, enterprises and individuals, including an increase of US$56.9 billion in the balance of foreign reserve deposits of domestic banks in the first eight months of this year, with a US$27 billion increase in August alone. Second, outbound investment by domestic enterprises has grown rapidly. Third, domestic enterprises and other market entities are reducing foreign financing steadily, which helps reduce risks of high leverage operation and currency mismatch. These changes are normal capital flow, which is moderate and manageable. Foreign investors who aim at long-term gains are still investing in China. China's foreign exchange reserves remain abundant and is still very large by international standard. With improvement to the RMB exchange rate regime and progress in RMB internationalization, it is quite normal that China's foreign reserves may increase or decrease, and there is no need to overreact to it.
《华尔街日报》：很多在中国有大规模投资的美资以及其他外资公司都反映近年来在华投资环境发生变化，很多政策都会大幅向他们的中国同行业竞争者倾斜，因此对他们产生不公平影晌。美国商业团体多次提到诸如思科这样的美国信息技术公司常常会成为类似不公平政策的受害者。您如何回应这样的质疑？ 您对外资公司的期待有哪些？华为这样的中国信息科技公司也在抱怨他们在美国受到不公平待遇。您觉得两国是否有必要出台一些专门规则来处理信息技术公司面临的问题？
9. Many U.S. and other foreign companies that are invested heavily in China say that the business climate has changed and that they are subject to unfair regulation that favors Chinese competitors. U.S. business groups say companies that provide information technology like Cisco are being particularly targeted. What's your response to that? What do you expect from foreign companies? Chinese information technology companies like Huawei also complain of business difficulties in the U.S. Do both countries need to work out special rules for info-tech products?
习近平：利用外资是我们的长期方针。中国利用外资的政策不会变，对外商投资企业合法权益的保障不会变，为各国企业在华投资兴业提供更好服务的方向不会变。吸收外资给中国现代化建设提供了必要的资金、先进的技术、宝贵的管理经验、众多的国际化人才，对促进中国经济发展发挥了积极作用。
XI:Attracting foreign investment is our long-term policy. Such policy will not change. Nor will our protection of the lawful rights and interests of foreign companies in China, and our commitment to better services in favor of foreign companies in China. Foreign investment, which has provided China with capital, advanced technologies, managerial expertise and professional talents with international vision, all needed for the country's modernization drive, has played a significant role in promoting China's economic development.
中国尊重非歧视性规则的国际营商惯例，遵守国民待遇等入世承诺，公平公正对待包括外商投资企业在内的所有市场主体，欢迎跨国公司同中国企业开展各种形式合作。近年来，中国采取了一系列措施，推进投资便利化，大幅度取消限制类项目，推动以准入前国民待遇加负面清单的管理模式，及时解决外国投资者合理关切，保护他们的合法权益，努力营造公开透明的法律政策环境、高效的行政环境、平等竞争的市场环境。
Chinarespects international business practice of non-discrimination and has fulfilled its national treatment and other commitments upon WTO accession. We give equal and fair treatment to all market players, including foreign-invested companies in China, and welcome all forms of cooperation between transnational corporations and their Chinese counterparts. In recent years, China has taken a series of investment facilitation steps, significantly cancelling restrictive items and adopting a management model based on pre-establishment national treatment plus negative list approach. By so doing, we aim to timely address the legitimate concerns of foreign investors, protect their lawful rights and interests, and foster a level playing field with open and transparent laws and policies, along with a more efficient administration.
联合国贸易和发展会议等国际权威机构调查表明，中国依然是当前全球最具吸引力的投资东道国。有关中国投资环境发生变化、外资对中国失去信心的说法很不符合实际。2014年，中国吸引外资规模居世界第一，达到1200亿美元，连续23年保持发展中国家首位。今年头8个月，中国实际利用外资853亿美元，同比增长9%。中国将进一步放宽对外商投资的市场准入，同时也要健全外商投资监管体系，修订外商投资相关法律，依法保障外商投资企业合法权益。
According to surveys by the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development (Unctad) and other authoritative international bodies, China remains the world's most attractive investment destination. Claims about a changing investment climate in China and foreign investors losing confidence in China are not backed by facts. In 2014, China received US$120 billion in foreign investment, more than any other country, and continued to be the leading destination among the developing countries for 23 years running. In the first eight months of this year, the actual amount of foreign investment used by China totaled US$85.3 billion, up by 9% from the corresponding period of the previous year. China will further ease market access for foreign investment. At the same time, we will improve regulations on foreign investment, amend relevant laws and better protect the lawful rights and interests of foreign investment in China.
希望外国市场的大门也能对中国投资者敞开。我们反对任何形式的保护主义、反对任何形式的歧视性政策，愿通过协商妥善解决同有关国家的经贸分歧，积极推动建立均衡、共赢、关注发展的多边经贸体制。
It is my hope that other countries will keep their markets open to Chinese investors. We are against protectionism and discriminative policies of all forms, stand ready to properly settle economic and trade disputes with relevant countries through consultation, and promote a balanced multilateral economic and trade system that focuses on development and seeks win-win results.
《华尔街日报》：中国政府近年来对互联网相关政策和法律进行了调整和强化，出台了很多针对互联网的言论，尤其是在社交媒体上发表言论的禁令。包括《华尔街日报》网站在内的很多外国网站在大陆地区陆续被封。之前发布的相关法律草案也让外国非营利组织机构担忧其在中国的活动会进一步受到限制。中国还是否会对外开放，或是中国政府担心外国的影响会导致中国出现社会动荡？
10. The government has placed new restrictions and passed laws that limit expression on the Internet, particularly social media. Foreign news sites - including those of The Wall Street Journal - have been blocked. Foreign nonprofit groups, meanwhile, are alarmed by a proposed law that would place conditions on their operations in China. Is China opening up, or is the government concerned that foreign influence may cause turmoil in Chinese society?
习近平：互联网作为20世纪最伟大的发明之一，把世界变成了“地球村”，深刻改变着人们的生产生活，有力推动着社会发展，具有高度全球化的特性。但是，这块“新疆域”不是“法外之地”，同样要讲法治，同样要维护国家主权、安全、发展利益。
XI:As one of the greatest inventions of the 20th century, the Internet has turned the world into a global village by profoundly changing the way people live and work and vigorously boosting social development. Though highly global, this new frontier is by no means a land beyond law. Rule of law also applies to the Internet, with the need to safeguard a country's sovereignty, security and development interests as relevant as in the real world.
网络空间与现实社会一样，既要提倡自由，也要遵守秩序。自由是秩序的目的，秩序是自由的保障。我们既要充分尊重网民交流思想、表达意愿的权利，也要构建良好的网络秩序，这也是为了更好保障广大网民合法权益。中国互联网蓬勃发展，为各国企业提供了广阔的发展机遇和市场空间。只要遵守中国法律法规，不损害中国国家利益和消费者利益，我们欢迎外国企业在华发展，尊重和保护外国企业合法利益。国际社会要本着相互尊重和相互信任的原则，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间。
Freedom and order must be upheld side by side in both cyberspace and the physical world. Freedom is the purpose of order, and order the guarantee of freedom. We need to fully respect netizens' rights to express themselves, while at the same time, ensure a sound cyberspace order to better protect the lawful rights and interests of all netizens. China's Internet is booming, providing immense opportunities and market horizon for businesses around the world. We welcome all foreign companies in China and will respect and protect their lawful rights and interests provided that they abide by the laws and regulations of China and do nothing to undermine China's national interests and interests of Chinese consumers. The international community as a whole should work together to build a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cyberspace on the basis of the principles of mutual respect and mutual trust.
中国肯定境外非营利组织的积极作用，欢迎和支持他们来华发展，我们愿继续提供必要的便利和协助。中国重视境外非营利组织在华活动的服务管理工作，依法规范他们在华活动，保障他们在华合法权益。境外非营利组织在中国活动应该遵守中国法律，依法、规范、有序开展活动。
China recognizes the positive role of foreign nonprofit organizations (NPOs), welcomes and supports their development in China, and stands ready to provide them with necessary facilitation and assistance. Taking seriously the provision of services to and regulation of foreign NPOs in China, we will regulate, in accordance with law, their activities and protect their lawful rights and interests. All foreign NPOs should obey Chinese law and carry out their activities on a law-abiding and orderly basis.
《华尔街日报》：大规模反腐是您在国内最受欢迎的行动之一。如何确保反腐行动能够更加以规则和机制为基础？官员财产公开是否会推行？有商界人士认为反腐影响了经济发展，您是否会为了提升经济而放松在反腐方面的努力？
11. The anticorruption campaign you began has been among your most popular initiatives at home. What is being done to base anticorruption efforts more on rules and institutions? Will officials be required to report their assets publicly? Businesspeople have complained that the campaign is hurting the economy. Are you prepared to relax the crackdown to help the economy?
反腐败是世界各国面临的共同任务，也是民心所向。中国共产党的根本宗旨是全心全意为人民服务，中国共产党执政的基础是人民拥护，必须保持同人民群众的血肉联系。中国共产党不是生活在真空中，党内肯定会有这样那样的问题，腐败问题就是其中一个顽症。中国共产党敢于直面问题、纠正错误，善于自我净化、自我革新。人民群众最痛恨腐败，我们必须顺应民心。所以，要“老虎”、“苍蝇”一起打。中共十八大以来，我们加大了反腐败斗争力度，依法查处了一大批腐败分子，包括查处了曾经身居很高职位的一些人，赢得了中国人民支持和赞扬。
XI: Cracking down on corruption is what all countries must do and what their peoples wish to see. The ultimate purpose of the Chinese Communist Party is to serve the people wholeheartedly. Our Party owes its governing status to the support of the people, so we must maintain its flesh-and-blood ties with the people. The Party does not operate in a vacuum, so it has unavoidably found itself with problems of one kind or another. Corruption is just such a persistent one. The Party must be courageous enough to face up to the problem and go out to correct it through self-purification and self-rectification. Our people hate corruption more than anything else and we must act to allay their concerns. Therefore, we decided to go after both “tigers and flies,” wrongdoers regardless of their ranks. Since the the 18th CPC National congress, we have intensified anticorruption efforts, dealt with a large number of corrupt officials in accordance with law, including some who used to hold very high offices, and won extensive support and thumbs-up from the Chinese people.
关于反腐败制度建设，我有两句话，一句是“把权力关进制度的笼子里”，一句是“阳光是最好的防腐剂”。随着反腐败斗争向纵深推进，我们要着力形成不敢腐、不能腐、不想腐的体制机制。我们正在制定和完善相关法律法规，扎细扎密扎牢制度的笼子，真正把权力关进其中。关于官员财产公开，我们在2010年就通过有关规定，将领导干部收入等涉及财产性内容列入个人报告事项，每年定期抽查核实，现在核实的比例不断提高，任何人都不能例外。对不如实报告的人，我们有硬性的处理措施。
the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of ChinaOn institutional building in this respect, let me share with you two remarks I made. The first is that we must keep power in the cage of systemic checks. The other one is, transparency is the best precaution against corruption. As we go further in the anticorruption campaign, we will focus more on institutional building so that officials will not dare and cannot afford to be corrupt and, more importantly, have no desire to take that course. Right now, we are formulating and updating relevant laws and regulations to truly put power inside a more closely-knit cage of effective checks. With respect to asset disclosure by officials, we adopted relevant regulations back in 2010 to require such reporting which was subject to random check and verification every year. The proportion of verified reporting has increased steadily, and no one would take exception. Should anyone be found to be dishonest, they will be punished accordingly.
我说过，反腐没有休止符。我们将坚持零容忍的态度不变、猛药去病的决心不减、刮骨疗伤的勇气不泄、严厉惩处的尺度不松，做到有腐必反、有贪必肃。反腐败不会影响经济发展。惩治腐败，打击权力寻租，可以推动建设廉洁政府，推动清除阻碍市场机制运行的障碍，促进规则公平，创造更好的投资营商环境。
I once said that the fight against corruption never ends. Our zero tolerance to corruption will never change. Nor will our determination, courage and severity with which we punish it in order to rid the Party of corruption. All acts of corruption must be dealt with. Anticorruption efforts will not hurt the economy. On the contrary, fighting corruption, including such malpractices as rent-seeking, will help build a clean government, remove hurdles that impede market operations, promote fair rules and bring about a better investment and business environment.
《华尔街日报》：作为中国国家主席，您出访了世界上很多国家，您的夫人彭丽媛女士因为她作为联合国亲善大使的工作被大家熟知。从您个人经验来看，您觉得美国和世界上其他国家对中国有哪些不理解的地方？而中国老百姓又对美国和世界上其他国家有哪些不理解的地方？
12. You've traveled widely as China's leader, and your wife is well-known for her work as a U.N. goodwill ambassador. From your experiences, what do you think the U.S. and the rest of the world don't understand about China, and similarly what do many Chinese not get about the U.S. and the rest of the world?
习近平：1985年，也就是30年前，我曾率团前往艾奥瓦州考察农业技术，那是我第一次到访美国。美国的先进技术和美国人民的热情友好都给我留下了深刻印象。此后，我多次来过美国，也在中国接待过许多美国友人。从这些交往中，我切身体会到中美两国人民相互怀着十分友好的感情。我的夫人长期从事声乐表演和教学工作，近年来担任了世界卫生组织结核病和艾滋病防治亲善大使、联合国教科文组织促进女童和妇女教育特使，同包括美国在内的各国机构和人士有很多交流，她也有同样的感受。
XI:Thirty years ago in 1985, I led a delegation to Iowa to study agricultural technology. It was my first visit to the U.S. I was deeply impressed with the advanced U.S. technology and the warmth and friendship of the American people. Since then, I have made several trips to the U.S. and hosted many American friends in China. I could tell from these personal experiences that the Chinese and Americans cherish very friendly sentiments toward each other. My wife is a performing artist and music professor. In recent years, as the WHO Goodwill Ambassador for Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS and the Unesco special envoy for the Advancement of Girls' and Women's Education, she has met many Americans and people from organizations of other countries. She shares my impressions.
国与国交往始于人民。中美两国人民的交往和友谊源远流长。早在230多年前，美国商船“中国皇后号”远渡重洋来到中国。70多年前，在中国人民奋起抗击日本军国主义侵略斗争中，美国人民跨越海洋和地心引力气义无反顾前来中国帮助我们。36年前，中美建立外交关系，揭开两国人民友好交往新的一页。实践证明，中美两国友好可以跨越时空。
Interactions between countries start with their people. Exchanges and friendship between our two peoples have a long history. Over 230 years ago, U.S. merchant vessel Empress of China sailed across vast oceans to China. Over 70 years ago, American people resolutely defied sea and gravity to help the Chinese people in their heroic fight against the aggression of Japanese militarists. Thirty-six years ago, China and the U.S. established diplomatic ties, turning a new chapter in the annals of friendly exchanges between the two peoples. What has happened proves that China-U.S. friendship transcends time and space.
中国古代思想家孟子说过：“物之不齐，物之情也。”国与国之间的确存在相互不理解的问题，但这就是生活。既然世界上存在着不同的民族、历史、文化、宗教、 制度、发展水平、生活方式，那就肯定会存在一些相互不那么好理解的事情。但是，我认为，一切看上去不可理解的事情都是可以理解的，关键是要想去理解并努力去理解，而不要排斥。丰富多彩的人类文明都有自己存在的价值。本国本民族要珍惜和维护自己的思想文化，也要承认和尊重别国别民族的思想文化。强调承认和尊重本国本民族的文明成果，不是要搞自我封闭，更不是要搞唯我独尊。“独学而无友，则孤陋而寡闻。”对人类社会创造的各种文明，我们都应该采取学习借鉴的态度，把跨越时空、超越国度、富有永恒魅力、具有当代价值的优秀文化精神弘扬起来。中国愿同包括美国在内的国际社会一道，在发展中谋共赢，在合作中同进步， 让中国人民更加幸福，让世界人民共享和平与发展成果。
As an ancient Chinese philosopher Mencius said, “It's only natural for things to be different.” Lack of understanding between countries is indeed a question, but this is life. With so much difference in ethnicity, history, culture, religion, social system, development level and lifestyle, there are things about others that one may find hard to understand. This is for sure, but that said, it is also true that anything that is seemingly incomprehensible can be understood provided that one is ready to learn and make an effort to understand it instead of dismissing it altogether. Every civilization, distinct and colorful as it is, possesses the value for its existence. A country or a nation should cherish and protect its own culture and values, and at the same time, recognize and respect those of others. While feeling proud of one's own cultural achievements, a country or a nation must not shut its door to the outside, still less, indulge in self-aggrandizement. As an old Chinese saying goes, “Learning alone without exchanges with others will lead to ignorance.” We should be ready to learn from other civilizations and carry forward their time-honored values that transcend national borders and retain appeal in modern times. China is ready to work with the U.S. and others in the international community with a view to seeking common progress through win-win cooperation, so as to deliver greater happiness to the Chinese people and ensure peace and development for the people around the world.
126. 习近平接受拉美四国媒体联合采访全文
问：金砖国家合作已经走过5个年头，您如何评价金砖国家过去5年的合作，今后如何加强？您对这次金砖国家领导人福塔莱萨会晤有何期待？在发达国家经济发展放缓甚至停滞的情况下，金砖国家被寄予厚望，您认为金砖国家怎样才能克服内部差异性较大这一问题，成为全球经济发展的引擎？
How do you evaluate BRICS cooperation in the past five years since its inception and how would it be strengthened in the future? What is your expectation of the upcoming BRICS Summit in Fortaleza? Given the slowdown or even stagnation of the developed economies, great hopes are placed on the BRICS countries. How could the BRICS countries overcome their diversity to become the engine of the global economy?
答：过去5年里，金砖国家形成了以领导人会晤为引领，多层次、宽领域的合作架构。各成员国政治互信不断增强，在经济、金融、贸易、发展等诸多领域务实合作不断深化，在重大国际事务中的沟通和协调不断加强。
Over the past five years, BRICS has formed a pattern of multi-tiered and wide-ranging cooperation that is led by the leaders' meeting. Among BRICS countries, there has been growing political mutual trust, expanding practical cooperation in economy, finance, trade, development and many other areas as well as increasing communication and coordination on important international affairs.
事实证明，占世界人口42.6%的金砖国家经济发展、社会稳定、协调合作、共同成长，顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，有利于世界经济更加平衡、全球治理更加有效、国际关系更加民主。
What has happened has proved that when BRICS countries, which account for 42.6% of the world population, enjoy economic growth and social stability and work together for common development, it conforms with the call of the times for peace, development and win-win cooperation and will thus facilitate a more balanced world economy, more effective global governance and more democratic international relations.
巴西作家保罗·科埃略说：“世界掌握在那些有勇气凭借自己的才能去实现自己梦想的人手中。”当前，国际形势继续发生深刻复杂变化，世界经济复苏逐渐稳固，但仍面临诸多风险挑战。在这一背景下，福塔莱萨会晤肩负着总结合作历程、规划未来发展的使命，对金砖国家合作进程具有承前启后的重要意义。我期待这次会晤深化合作、体现包容、传递信心。
The Brazilian author Paulo Coelho once said, "The world is in the hands of those who have the courage to live their dreams with their talent." Today, the international landscape continues to undergo intricate changes. The world economy is recovering steadily, but still faces many risks and challenges. Against this backdrop, the Fortaleza summit has great significance in advancing BRICS cooperation as it will take stock of past progress and plan for the future. I hope that the summit could deepen cooperation, display inclusiveness and convey confidence.
深化合作，就是要从战略上谋划金砖国家未来发展。去年，我在德班会晤时建议，金砖国家要朝着“一体化大市场、多层次大流通、陆海空大联通、文化大交流”的目标迈进。这是我对金砖国家发展更紧密经济伙伴关系的真诚期待。希望各方以启动新一轮领导人会晤为契机，规划新的合作愿景，挖掘新的合作动力，使金砖国家合作机制更加完善、政策协调更加成熟、务实合作更加深入，让金砖国家合作本强基固。
To deepen cooperation means we need to make strategic planning for BRICS' future development. At the Durban summit last year, I proposed that "BRICS should move toward the goal of integrated markets, multi-tiered network, connectivity by land, air and sea, and greater cultural exchanges". This is my keen expectation for closer economic partnership among BRICS. I hope that all the members could make full use of the beginning summit of a new cycle to come up with new vision, find new dynamism, and solidify BRICS cooperation through better institutions, more mature policy coordination and more substantive practical cooperation.
体现包容，就是要对内互学互鉴、取长补短，对外扩大开放、追求共赢。金砖国家国情不同、文化各异，对一些问题的看法不尽相同。这种多样性和差异性不应该成为合作的阻力，而应该也能够成为金砖国家优势互补、实现包容性合作的重要动力。金砖国家合作不是独善其身，而是致力于同世界各国共同发展。福塔莱萨会晤期间将举行金砖国家同南美国家领导人对话会。希望双方就共同关心的国际和地区问题充分交换意见，增进了解，推动合作，同时探讨经贸人文领域务实合作。
To display inclusiveness means that BRICS countries should learn from and complement each other while opening up further to the rest of the world in pursuit of win-win outcome. Given the different national conditions and culture, the BRICS countries may have different views on certain issues. But such diversity and differences should and can motivate rather than impede complementary and inclusive BRICS cooperation. BRICS cooperation is not solely aimed at self improvement. It is intended to bring about common development through concerted efforts with all other countries. On the sidelines of the Fortaleza summit, the BRICS leaders will have a dialogue with leaders of South American countries. It is hoped that the two sides will have an in-depth exchange of views on regional and international issues of mutual interest, enhance mutual understanding and collaboration, and explore practical cooperation in the economic, trade, people-to-people and cultural areas.
传递信心，就是要坚定对金砖国家团结互信的信心，坚定对金砖国家发展前景的信心，坚定市场和公众对金砖国家经济的信心。风物长宜放眼量。金砖国家都有推进经济结构改革和创新发展的需要，都有维护国际公平正义、维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益的愿望。只要金砖国家增进政治互信，凝聚战略共识，发出更多声音，提出更多方案，就能够为推动世界经济增长、完善全球经济治理、促进世界和平与发展贡献更多正能量。
To convey confidence means we should have full confidence in the solidarity and mutual trust among the BRICS countries and in the prospect of BRICS, and also boost the confidence of the market and people in the BRICS economies. It is important to take a long-term perspective. The BRICS countries have the need to pursue economic restructuring and innovative development. We also share the desire to safeguard international justice and equity and uphold the common interests of emerging markets and developing countries. As long as the BRICS countries continue to build political mutual trust and strategic consensus, make our voice heard and propose more solutions, we will contribute more positive energy to world economic growth, better global economic governance and world peace and development.
巴西是金砖国家合作的积极参与者，在筹备福塔莱萨会晤方面做了大量卓有成效的工作。我相信，在巴方主持下，福塔莱萨会晤一定会书写金砖国家合作史上又一精彩篇章。
Brazil plays an active role in BRICS cooperation and has done a great deal of work to make the Fortaleza summit possible. I am confident that with Brazil as the chair, the Fortaleza summit will become another success in the history of BRICS cooperation.
问：您如何评价中国同巴西全面战略伙伴关系发展水平？中方愿意在哪些领域同巴方开展合作，是否将继续扩大在巴西投资？
What is your view of the China-Brazil global strategic partnership? In which areas will China cooperate with Brazil? Will China increase investment in Brazil?
答：中国和我本人都高度重视发展中巴全面战略伙伴关系。我高兴地看到，在双方共同努力下，中巴政治和战略互信达到前所未有的高水平，务实合作达到前所未有的深度和广度。
The Chinese side and I myself attach great importance to growing the global strategic partnership with Brazil. I am delighted to see that, thanks to joint efforts, our political and strategic trust has reached an unprecedented level, and bilateral practical cooperation has reached such a depth and breadth as never seen before.
去年，我同罗塞夫总统两次在多边场合举行双边会见，还通了电话。我们就中巴关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见，就加强双方各领域互利友好合作达成重要共识。
Last year, President Rousseff and I had two bilateral meetings on multilateral occasions. We also stayed in contact through phone calls. We have had in-depth discussion on China-Brazil relations and issues of shared interest, and reached important agreement on enhancing our mutually beneficial cooperation in various fields.
去年，两国双边贸易额突破900亿美元，中国保持巴西第一大贸易伙伴地位，巴西成为中国第九大贸易伙伴。双方能源资源、制造业、金融、农业等领域互利合作成果丰硕。中巴务实合作不仅使两国人民得到越来越多的实惠，也将两国发展越来越紧密地联系在一起。
Two-way trade volume exceeded US$90 billion last year. China remains Brazil's largest trading partner, and Brazil has become China's ninth largest trading partner. The two sides have conducted win-win, fruitful cooperation in energy, resources, manufacturing, finance and agriculture. The practical cooperation between China and Brazil has not only generated more and more real benefits for our two peoples, but also brought our two countries more closely together in the course of development.
作为重要的新兴市场国家和发展中国家，中巴双方在重大全球性议题上开展了卓有成效的战略协作，共同致力于推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展，维护发展中国家共同利益。
As major emerging markets and developing countries, China and Brazil have been engaged in effective strategic coordination on major global issues. We are both committed to making the international order more just and equitable and upholding common interests of developing countries.
今年是中巴建交40周年。孔子说：“四十而不惑”。我期待着在对巴西进行国事访问期间，同巴西领导人共同总结两国关系发展经验，探讨采取切实措施，密切两国全方位交流合作，提升中巴关系水平。中方愿意同巴方一道，坚持将对方视为重要合作伙伴，坚持互利共赢原则，推动双边贸易持续稳定增长，同时结合两国各自发展规划，积极开展产业投资合作，不断开拓新的合作领域，更好促进中巴两国经济社会发展。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China-Brazil diplomatic ties. Confucius once said, "One should have no more doubts when he is 40." I am looking forward to my state visit to Brazil. During the visit, the Brazilian leaders and I will sum up the experience of growing our bilateral relations, discuss concrete steps to build closer cooperation and exchanges in all fields and upgrade our bilateral relations. Our two countries should continue to see each other as important partners. China is ready to work with Brazil under the principle of mutual benefit to promote sustained growth of two-way trade. At the same time, we could, bearing in mind our respective plans of development, carry out industrial investment cooperation and keep exploring new areas of cooperation so as to contribute more to economic and social development of our two countries.
问：您如何评价中国同阿根廷战略伙伴关系发展水平？今后两国可以在哪些重点领域开展合作？
How do you assess the current China-Argentina strategic partnership? What do you think are the major areas in which the two countries will be able to work together?
答：中阿建交40多年来，在双方共同努力下，两国关系持续快速发展。阿根廷史诗《马丁·菲耶罗》中有这样一句话：“兄弟之道是团结同心。”中阿已经成为相互信任的好朋友、平等互利的好伙伴。
Since the establishment of diplomatic relations more than 40 years ago, our bilateral ties have moved forward rapidly thanks to the joint efforts of the two sides. As a line from the Argentine epic Martin Fierro goes, "Brothers have to be united, because this is the first law." China and Argentina have become trustworthy friends and equal partners in win-win cooperation.
去年，我同克里斯蒂娜总统在二十国集团领导人圣彼得堡峰会上举行双边会见，就加强中阿各领域交流合作深入交换意见。那次会见给我留下深刻印象。中方赞赏阿方坚持一个中国原则，支持阿方对马岛的主权要求。
Last year, President Cristina and I met at the G20 St. Petersburg Summit. We had an in-depth exchange of views on increasing exchanges and cooperation between our two countries in all fields. The meeting is still vivid in my memory. China appreciates Argentina's commitment to the one-China principle and supports Argentina's claim on the sovereignty of the Malvinas.
2013年，双边贸易额达148亿美元，是建交之初的2400多倍，中国已经成为阿根廷第二大贸易伙伴和主要投资来源国，阿根廷成为中国在拉美的第五大贸易伙伴。双方能源资源、农业、基础设施建设、金融等领域合作富有成效，给两国人民带来了实实在在的利益。两国人文交流丰富多彩，中阿人民相互了解和友谊不断加深。在重大国际和地区事务中，中阿保持密切而良好的战略协作，有力维护了发展中国家共同利益。
In 2013, bilateral trade reached US$14.8 billion, more than 2,400 times of the amount in the early days of our diplomatic ties. China has become Argentina's second largest trading partner and a major source of investment. Argentina has become China's fifth largest trading partner in Latin America. The two sides have had productive cooperation in energy, resources, agriculture, infrastructure development and finance, bringing real benefits to the two peoples. Thanks to the rich programs of people-to-people exchanges, mutual understanding and friendship between the Chinese and Argentine people have deepened. On major international and regional affairs, China and Argentina have maintained close and sound strategic coordination, effectively upholding common interests of developing countries.
中国和我本人都高度重视中阿战略伙伴关系。我期待着同克里斯蒂娜总统就中阿关系及共同关心的问题深入交换意见，规划双边关系发展蓝图，密切各领域交流合作，促进双边贸易均衡稳定增长，提升产业投资、基础设施建设等领域互利合作水平，推动中阿战略伙伴关系迈上新台阶。
My country and I personally attach great importance to China-Argentina strategic partnership. I look forward to having an in-depth exchange of views with President Cristina on bilateral relations and issues of mutual interest to chart the course for the growth of bilateral relations, forge closer exchanges and cooperation in all fields, promote balanced and steady growth of bilateral trade and upgrade mutually beneficial cooperation in industrial investment and infrastructure development so as to bring China-Argentina strategic partnership to a new level.
问：您如何评价查韦斯总统为推动委中关系作出的贡献？中方对同马杜罗总统领导下的委内瑞拉加强合作，推动委中共同发展的战略伙伴关系有何期待？
How do you evaluate the contribution by President Hugo Chavez to Venezuela-China relations? What is China's expectation of enhancing cooperation and growing strategic partnership for common development with Venezuela under the leadership of President Maduro?
答：查韦斯总统是中国人民的伟大朋友，他生前高度重视发展对华关系，亲自关心和推动中委务实合作，为建立和发展中委共同发展的战略伙伴关系倾注了大量心血，作出了重要贡献。中国人民永远怀念他。
President Chavez was a great friend of the Chinese people. He was deeply committed to growing relations with China and personally involved in advancing practical cooperation between the two countries. The Chinese people will always remember him for his tremendous dedication and enormous contribution to the establishment and development of China-Venezuela strategic partnership for common development.
今年是中委建交40周年。建交以来，特别是2001年两国建立共同发展的战略伙伴关系以来，中委关系全面持续快速发展。两国高层往来密切，政治互信不断深化。两国能源、金融、基础设施建设、农业、高技术等领域务实合作成效显著。中委双边贸易额从建交初期的仅140万美元增至去年的192亿美元。中国已经成为委内瑞拉第二大贸易伙伴，委内瑞拉成为中国在拉美的第四大贸易伙伴、重要能源合作伙伴和工程承包市场。两国人文交流日益密切，夯实了两国友好的民意基础。马杜罗总统去年9月成功对中国进行国事访问，有力促进了中委关系进一步发展。近期双方围绕建交40周年，共同举办了一系列丰富多彩的活动，增进了两国人民相互了解和友谊。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of the diplomatic relations between China and Venezuela. Since the establishment of diplomatic ties, especially the establishment of strategic partnership for common development in 2001, China-Venezuela relations have witnessed comprehensive, sustained and rapid growth. The two countries enjoy close high-level exchanges and ever-deepening political mutual trust. Our practical cooperation in energy, finance, infrastructure development, agriculture and hi-tech has been productive. Bilateral trade volume grew to US$19.2 billion last year from only US$1.4 million in the early days of diplomatic relations. China has become Venezuela's second largest trading partner. Venezuela is China's fourth largest trading partner in Latin America, an important partner for energy cooperation and a major market of contracted projects. The ever-closer people-to-people exchange has cemented popular support for the friendly relations between the two countries. Last September, President Maduro paid a successful state visit to China, giving a strong boost to China-Venezuela relations. Recently, the two sides have jointly organized a series of activities in celebration of the 40th anniversary, which have enhanced the mutual understanding and friendship between the two peoples.
目前，中委关系正处在承前启后、继往开来的重要阶段。中方高度重视发展中委关系，愿意同委方携手合作，以两国建交40周年为契机，提高双边关系水平，加强各领域互利合作，推动两国关系在新形势下得到更大发展。我期待着访问委内瑞拉，同马杜罗总统深入探讨两国全方位合作，共同规划双边关系美好未来，推动中委关系迈上新台阶，更好造福两国人民。
The relationship between China and Venezuela is at an important stage from which it will move to a new era based on past achievements. China highly values its relations with Venezuela and stands ready to work with Venezuela, taking the 40th anniversary as an opportunity, to upgrade bilateral relations, step up mutually beneficial cooperation in all fields and promote greater development of bilateral relations in the new era. I look forward to visiting Venezuela to have an in-depth exchange of views with President Maduro on all-dimensional cooperation between the two countries, draw plans for the future of bilateral relations, take our relations to a new level and bring more benefits to our two peoples.
问：您如何看待中国同古巴互利友好合作关系及其发展前景？
How do you view the friendly and cooperative relationship between China and Cuba and its future development?
答：我曾经于2011年6月访问古巴，同劳尔主席进行坦诚深入的交流，古巴人民的热情友好给我留下深刻印象。
I visited Cuba in June 2011. During that visit, I had open and in-depth exchange of views with President Raul Castro and was deeply impressed by the warmth and hospitality of the Cuban people.
1960年，古巴在西半球率先同新中国建交，揭开了中古关系、中拉关系发展新篇章。半个多世纪以来，中古友好关系日益成熟，合作内涵不断丰富。两国在建设本国特色社会主义道路上携手并进，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互支持，在处理重大国际和地区问题上密切配合。中古关系经受住了国际风云变幻的考验，已经成为发展中国家团结合作的典范。
In 1960, Cuba took the lead among countries in the Western Hemisphere to establish diplomatic relations with New China, opening a new chapter for the growth of China' s relations with Cuba and with Latin America and the Caribbean. Over the past half a century and more, the friendly relationship between China and Cuba has increasingly matured and our cooperation has been steadily enriched. Our two countries have progressed hand in hand along the path of socialism with our respective characteristics, supported each other on issues concerning our respective core interests and coordinated closely on major regional and international issues. This relationship has stood the test of constant changes in the international landscape and set an example of unity and cooperation between developing countries.
古巴民族英雄何塞·马蒂说：“团结是全世界的语言。”中古是好朋友、好同志、好兄弟，有相同的理想和信念。当前，两国都处于发展的关键时期，应该抓住机遇，共谋发展。双方要密切高层往来，分享治国理政经验，加快推进农业、基础设施建设、能矿、旅游、可再生能源、生物技术等重点领域合作，加强人文和地方交流，密切多边协作。相信在双方一道努力下，两国高水平的政治关系将转化为丰硕的务实合作成果，中古互利友好合作将不断迈上新台阶。
Cuban national hero Jose Marti said, "To be united: this is the word of the world." China and Cuba are good friends, good comrades and good brothers who share the same visions and beliefs. Both countries have now come to a critical juncture in our development when opportunities must be seized for common development. We should maintain close high-level exchanges, share experience in governance, speed up cooperation in priority areas such as agriculture, infrastructure, energy and mineral resources, tourism, renewable energy and biotechnology, enhance people-to-people and local exchanges and conduct close coordination on multilateral arenas. I believe that with concerted efforts of the two sides, our high-level political relations will be translated into rich results in practical cooperation, and our mutually-beneficial and friendly cooperation will be lifted to new levels.
我期待着访问古巴期间同劳尔主席共同总结两国关系发展经验，对中古关系未来发展作出规划。
I look forward to meeting President Raul Castro during my visit to Cuba to take stock of experience in growing the bilateral relationship and chart the course for its future development.
问：您如何评价当前中国同拉美关系水平？您对中拉整体关系发展有怎样的规划和设想？
How would you comment on the current level of relations between China and Latin America and the Caribbean? What are your plans and visions for the growth of the overall relationship between the two sides?
答：“相知无远近，万里尚为邻。”这句中国古诗是中国同拉美和加勒比国家关系的真实写照。中拉都是发展中国家，处在相似的发展阶段，肩负着相同的发展任务。我们支持对方走符合本国国情的发展道路，致力于推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。这些是我们能够求同存异、携手共进的根本动因。
"Bosom friends make distance disappear." This line from an ancient Chinese poem well captures the relations between China and Latin America and the Caribbean. China and Latin American and the Caribbean states are all developing countries in about the same development stage and face the same task of striving for development. We support each other in pursuing development paths that suit our respective national conditions and are committed to making the international order more just and equitable. These are the fundamental reasons which enable us to seek common ground while shelving differences and stand by each other's side in our joint pursuit of development.
新世纪以来，中拉双方牢牢把握共同发展的主题，政治上深化互信，经贸上扩大合作，人文上互学互鉴，在国际事务中密切配合，推动中拉关系实现长足发展，树立了南南合作的典范。
Since the beginning of the new century, China and Latin American and the Caribbean states, focusing on the theme of common development, have deepened mutual trust in the political field, expanded cooperation in economy and trade, learned from each other in cultural and people-to-people exchanges and coordinated closely in international affairs. This has made it possible for us to make big strides in our relations and set a model for South-South cooperation.
经贸务实合作是中拉关系的重要支柱。近年来，中拉贸易额节节攀升，2013年达到创纪录的2616亿美元。中国已经成为拉美第二大贸易伙伴国和第三大投资来源国，双方能源资源、基础设施建设、金融、农业、制造业、高技术等领域互利合作硕果累累，有力促进了各自国家经济发展和民生改善。
Practical cooperation in economy and trade is an important pillar for relations between the two sides. In recent years, two-way trade has continued to rise and reached a record high of US$261.6 billion in 2013. China has become the second largest trading partner and the third largest source of investment of Latin America and the Caribbean. Our cooperation in energy and resources, infrastructure, finance, agriculture, manufacturing and high-tech has produced rich results for mutual benefit, giving a strong boost to economic growth and improvement in people' s wellbeing on both sides.
当前，中拉关系进一步发展面临重要机遇，拥有更好条件和更坚实基础。中国始终从战略高度和长远角度看待中拉关系，愿意同拉美和加勒比国家一道努力，推动平等互利、共同发展的中拉全面合作伙伴关系在更高水平向前发展，更好造福中拉双方人民和各国人民。
Now, we are presented with important opportunities and blessed with better conditions and a more solid basis to further grow our relations. China always views its relations with Latin American and the Caribbean states from a strategic height and long-term perspective, and stands ready to work together with them to advance the comprehensive and cooperative partnership featuring equality, mutual benefit and common development between the two sides to a higher level, so as to better benefit the people of China, Latin American and the Caribbean states, and the rest of the world.
建立中国－拉共体论坛，推动中拉整体合作，顺应区域和跨区域合作潮流，是中国同拉美和加勒比国家的共同愿望。
To establish a forum between China and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) for stronger cooperation between China and the region is consistent with the trend of regional and interregional cooperation. It is also the shared aspiration of China and Latin American and the Caribbean states.
今年1月在古巴哈瓦那举行的拉共体第二届峰会通过《关于支持建立中国－拉共体论坛的特别声明》，为推进中拉整体合作、提高中拉关系水平奠定了重要基础。古巴为此发挥了重要作用，中方对此高度赞赏。
At the second CELAC Summit held in Havana, Cuba in January this year, a special statement on the establishment of a China-CELAC forum was adopted, which laid an important foundation for promoting the overall cooperation and uplifting the relationship between the two sides. Cuba has played an important role in this regard, which is highly appreciated by China.
目前，建立中国－拉共体论坛的条件已经成熟。中方愿意同拉方一道，本着相互尊重、平等互利的原则，用好中国－拉共体论坛这一整体合作平台，开展广泛领域的对话和合作，实现优势互补和共同发展，为维护中拉双方共同利益，推动南南合作，促进地区和世界和平、稳定、发展作出积极贡献。
Now, conditions are ripe for the establishment of the China-CELAC forum. China is ready to work with CELAC to make good use of the platform for overall cooperation provided by the forum in the spirit of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, conduct dialogue and cooperation across the board, and strive for mutual complementarity and common development, so as to contribute to upholding the common interests of the two sides, advancing South-South cooperation, and promoting regional and world peace, stability and development.
问：玻利瓦尔革命始终倡导捍卫和推动建设多极化世界，您如何看待国际关系民主化？
Bolivarian Revolution advocates upholding and promoting a multi-polar world. How do you view the issue of democracy in international relations?
答：当前，国际形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，世界多极化深入发展，多个发展中心在世界各地区逐渐形成，新兴市场国家和发展中国家整体实力增强，国际力量对比朝着有利于维护世界和平方向发展。
The international situation is undergoing profound and complex changes. The trend toward a multi-polar world is gathering momentum, multiple growth centers are emerging in various regions of the world, the overall strength of emerging markets and developing countries is rising, and the international balance of power is more favorable to maintaining world peace.
“大道之行也，天下为公。”公平正义是世界各国人民在国际关系领域追求的崇高目标。中国坚决维护国际公平正义，致力于推动世界多极化、国际关系民主化。我们主张世界的命运必须由各国人民共同掌握，世界上的事情只能由各国政府和人民共同商量来办。世界各国不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会的平等成员，应该共同推动国际关系民主化。
"When the great way is followed, all under the heaven will be equal." Equality and justice is the noble goal pursued by people around the world in international relations. China resolutely upholds international justice and equality, and is committed to promoting a multi-polar world and democracy in international relations. We maintain that the destiny of the world must be taken into the hands of peoples of all countries and that world affairs can only be handled through consultation by governments and peoples around the world. All countries, regardless of their size, strength or wealth, are equal members of the international community and should work together for greater democracy in international relations.
中委关系发展有利于增强发展中国家整体实力、促进国际关系民主化。双方应该在国际舞台上加强协作，并同其他发展中国家一道，共同维护发展中国家整体利益。
The growth of China-Venezuela relations will help enhance the overall strength of developing countries and promote democracy in international relations. The two sides should step up coordination on the international stage and work with other developing countries to jointly uphold the overall interests of developing countries.
问：中国如何进一步深化改革？中国发展对中国外交政策意味着什么？中国希望在全球扮演何种角色？
How would China further deepen reform? What is the significance of China's development for its foreign policy? What kind of role does China hope to play in the world?
答：中国发展虽然取得了巨大成就，但中国仍然是一个拥有13亿多人口的发展中大国，仍然处于并将长期处于社会主义初级阶段。中国人民正在努力实现现代化，这是人类历史上前无古人的伟大事业，需要付出十分艰苦的努力。
Despite the enormous achievements in its development, China remains a big developing country with a population of more than 1.3 billion. It remains and will continue to be at the primary stage of socialism for a long time. The Chinese people are striving to realize modernization, a great undertaking unprecedented in human history that requires painstaking efforts.
“艰难困苦，玉汝于成。”在过去30多年间，有6亿多中国人摆脱了贫困，对全球减贫事业贡献率达70%。中国经济占世界经济总量的比重从1%提高到12%，目前中国经济增长对全球经济增长贡献率将近30%。中国取得如此巨大的发展成就，最重要的一条经验就是我们坚持立足本国国情，坚持改革开放，走出了一条中国特色社会主义道路。
"Just as jade needs to be polished, one needs to go through trials and tribulations to be strong." In the past 30 years and more, over 600 million Chinese have been lifted out of poverty, accounting for 70% of the global achievement in poverty reduction. The share of the Chinese economy in the world economy has risen from 1% to 12%, and China's economic growth now contributes to nearly 30% of global growth. The most important reason for the tremendous accomplishments in China's development is that we are committed to reform and opening-up in light of China's national conditions and have embarked on a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics.
中国人自古就具有强烈的创新意识。“周虽旧邦，其命维新。”“天行健，君子以自强不息。”事实证明，没有改革开放，就没有中国的今天；没有改革开放，也不会有中国的未来。30多年来，我们用改革的办法解决了一系列重大问题；今后，我们还将坚持用改革的办法来破解前进道路上的各种困难和挑战。现在，我们确定了“两个一百年”奋斗目标，即到2020年国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入比2010年翻一番，全面建成小康社会；到本世纪中叶建成富强民主文明和谐的社会主义现代化国家，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。我们正在全面深化改革，完善和发展中国特色社会主义制度，推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化。我们将协调推进经济体制、政治体制、文化体制、社会体制、生态文明体制和党的建设制度改革。我们将以“明知山有虎，偏向虎山行”的政治勇气和智慧，以抓铁有痕、踏石留印的实干劲头推进改革，为中国现代化建设提供强大推动力量，更多更好造福中国人民，为世界带来新的发展机遇。
The Chinese people have long had a strong inclination towards innovation. As ancient Chinese sayings go, "Even an established nation like Zhou still regards self-renewal as its mission;" and "As heaven maintains vigor through movements, a gentleman should constantly strive for self-perfection." What has happened shows that without reform and opening-up, China could not have come to where it is today, nor can it have a future. Over the past 30 years and more, we have resolved a series of major issues through reform. Going forward, we will continue to meet the various difficulties and challenges through reform. We have put forward "two centenary goals", namely, to double the 2010 GDP and per capita income of urban and rural residents and complete the building of a society of moderate prosperity in all respects by 2020; and to build a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious and realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal by the middle of this century. We are now comprehensively deepening reform, improving and developing the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics and modernizing the state governance system and capacity. We will promote reform of the economic, political, cultural, social and ecological systems and the Party's development system in a balanced way. We will advance reform with the political courage and wisdom of "venturing into the mountain despite the fact there might be tigers there". When we step onto the stone, we will leave our footprints on it; and when we clutch a piece of iron, we will leave our handprints on it. This is the spirit we will uphold in pushing forward reform. By so doing, we strive to provide a stronger driving force for China's modernization, bring more and greater benefits to the Chinese people and create new development opportunities for the world.
中国作为人口最多的发展中国家的基本国情和定位没有改变，发展仍然是我们的第一要务。中国外交政策的宗旨就是维护世界和平、促进共同发展，为国内深化改革、实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标营造良好外部环境。中国人民爱好和平，中华民族的血液中没有侵略他人、称霸世界的基因，中国不认同“国强必霸”的陈旧逻辑。中国坚持走和平发展道路，既积极争取和平的国际环境发展自己，又以自身发展促进世界和平；既让中国更好利用世界的机遇，又让世界更好分享中国的机遇，促进中国和世界各国良性互动、互利共赢。
China's basic national conditions and status as the most populous developing country remain unchanged and development is still our top priority. The purpose of China's foreign policy is to uphold world peace, promote common development and foster a sound external environment for deepening reform and realizing the "two centenary goals" within China. The Chinese people love peace. It is not in the genes of the Chinese nation to invade other countries or seek world hegemony. China does not subscribe to the outdated logic that "a strong country is bound to seek hegemony". Committed to the path of peaceful development, China actively seeks a peaceful international environment for its development and also promotes world peace through its own development. By committing itself to peaceful development, China will make a better use of the opportunities in the world and also enable the world to better share in the opportunities brought by China, so as to promote sound interactions and mutual benefits between China and other countries in the world.
随着中国发展，中国将更好发挥负责任大国作用。我们将更加积极有为地维护世界和平，倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，致力于通过协商谈判和平解决争端。我们坚定维护以联合国为中心的战后国际秩序，积极参与联合国维和行动和地区安全对话合作。
As China develops, it will better play its role as a major responsible country. We will be more active in working to uphold world peace, advocate common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security and commit ourselves to peacefully resolving disputes through consultation and negotiation. We will firmly uphold the UN-centered post-war international order and actively participate in UN peacekeeping missions and regional security dialogue and cooperation.
我们将更加积极有为地参与国际事务，致力于推动完善国际治理体系，积极推动扩大发展中国家在国际事务中的代表性和发言权。我们将更多提出中国方案、贡献中国智慧，为国际社会提供更多公共产品。
We will play a more active role in international affairs, commit ourselves to improving international governance system, and make vigorous efforts to increase the representation and voice of developing countries in international affairs. We will offer more Chinese solutions, contribute Chinese wisdom and provide the international community with more public goods.
我们将更加积极有为地促进共同发展，坚持正确义利观，义利并举、以义为先，促进南北对话和南南合作，特别是帮助发展中国家实现自主和可持续发展。
We will more actively promote common development, uphold the right approach to justice and interests with a priority to justice, and promote North-South dialogue and South-South cooperation. In particular, we will help other developing countries achieve self and sustainable development.
111. 习近平接受路透社书面采访
问：您即将对英国进行国事访问。据悉英国王室和政府高度重视您的这次重要访问并做了精心安排。在上世纪90年代您曾经访问过英国，您对英国印象如何?对时隔20多年再次访问英国有何期待?这次访问会对中英关系和中欧关系产生怎样的影响?一些英国人对中国仍然抱有疑虑，认为英国政府急于讨好中国，如何保证英中关系互利互惠?
1. You will soon pay a state visit to the UK. It is learned that both the royal family and the government of the UK attach great importance to your visit and are making meticulous preparations for it. You visited the UK in the 1990s and what was your impression then? What do you expect from your coming visit to the UK after more than 20 years? What will be its impact on China-UK relations and China-EU relations? Some Britons fear China's intentions and believe that the British government is too eager to please China. How do you ensure that China-UK relationship is mutually beneficial?
答：1994年，我访问过伦敦、牛津、格拉斯哥、爱丁堡等地。那次访问给我留下了深刻印象，特别是英国悠久的历史、独特的文化、友好的人民、优美的环境令人难忘。
A: I visited London, Oxford, Glasgow and Edinburgh in 1994. I was deeply impressed by the visit, particularly Britain's long history, unique culture, friendly people and its beautiful environment.
这次我应伊丽莎白二世女王邀请对英国进行国事访问，期待着同英国领导人和各界朋友共商两国关系发展大计，为今后一个时期中英关系绘制路线图，为两国各领域务实合作注入新动力，共同开启中英全面战略伙伴关系的“黄金时代”。
During my upcoming state visit to the UK at the invitation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, I look forward to having discussions with British leaders and engaging the British public on our bilateral ties. I hope this will chart the course for the future growth of China-UK relations, inject new impetus in practical cooperation between our two countries in all fields and enable us to jointly usher in a "golden time" for China-UK comprehensive strategic partnership.
有关民意调查显示，英国民众对中国持较高的好感度。中英两国人民相互欣赏对方创造的悠久而特殊的文化，这是两国关系发展的重要基础和有利条件。当然，也有人对中英合作抱有这样那样的疑虑。我想强调的是，当今世界，任何国家都不能关起门来搞建设。打开门，就要热情接待四方来客。对客人热情周到，是世界公认的待客之道。英国表示愿做对华最开放的西方国家，这是一个明智的战略选择，也完全符合英国自身的长远利益。中国期待着同英国在更大范围、更高水平、更深层次上开展合作。
Public opinion surveys conducted in Britain show that views of China are largely favorable among the British people. Our two peoples appreciate each other's time-honored and unique cultures. This is an important foundation and favorable condition for growing bilateral ties. It is true that some people have some misgivings about China-UK cooperation. What I want to stress is that in today's world, no country can afford to pursue development with its door closed. One should open the door, warmly welcome friends and be hospitable to them. This is recognized international practice. The UK has stated that it will be the Western country that is most open to China. This is a visionary and strategic choice that fully meets Britain's own long-term interest. China looks forward to engaging with the UK in a wider range, at a higher level and in greater depth.
近年来，世界经济增长总体放缓，但中英两国投资经贸合作持续发展。英国已经成为欧盟内第二大对华投资国、中国在欧盟内第二大贸易伙伴和投资目的国，中国则是英国在欧盟外第二大贸易伙伴。2014年，中英双边贸易额首次突破800亿美元，中国自英国进口额5年内增长了两倍。中英双向投资增长迅猛。过去3年，中国对英国投资年均增长71.7%。去年，英国对中国投资同比增长87.6%，增速位居欧盟大国首位。
In recent years, while global growth has slowed down, China-UK investment and business cooperation has kept growing. The UK has become the EU's second largest investor in China as well as China's second largest trading partner and investment destination in the EU. China has been the UK's second largest non-EU trading partner. In 2014, China-UK trade volume for the first time exceeded 80 billion U.S. dollars, and China's import from the UK has doubled in five years. Two-way investment between China and the UK has grown rapidly. China's investment in the UK has risen at an annual rate of 71.7 percent over the past three years. Last year, the UK investment in China increased by 87.6 percent year-on-year, the fastest among major EU countries.
当前，英国政府制定了基础设施改造升级、打造“英格兰北部经济中心”、“英国工业2050战略”等宏大计划，这与中国提出的“一带一路”倡议、“中国制造2025”、“互联网+”等有很多合作契合点。中国愿同英国一道，秉持包容开放、合作共赢理念，提高合作水平，拓展合作领域，更好造福两国人民。
The British government has introduced ambitious plans on upgrading infrastructure, building the Northern Powerhouse in the north of England and implementing the strategy of UK Industry 2050. These plans and the "Road and Belt Initiative" and the initiatives of "Made in China 2025" and "Internet Plus" undertaken by China complement each other in many ways. China is ready to partner with the UK in the spirit of inclusiveness, opening up and seeking win-win progress through cooperation to upgrade and expand cooperation to deliver more benefits to our two peoples.
今年是中英全面战略伙伴关系第二个10年的开局之年，也是中欧建交40周年。中英关系和中欧关系发展面临继往开来的重要机遇。英国是欧盟重要成员国，中英关系同中欧关系相辅相成。去年，我对欧盟总部进行访问，同欧盟领导人一致商定，要打造中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系。相信中英关系新发展将为中欧关系全面推进注入新动力，为促进中欧四大伙伴关系建设作出新贡献。
This year marks the beginning of the second decade of the China-UK comprehensive strategic partnership and the 40th anniversary of China-EU diplomatic ties. Both China-UK relationship and China-EU relationship face important opportunities to build on past success for new progress. Since the UK is an important member of the EU, China-UK relationship and China-EU relationship reinforce each other. During my visit to the EU Headquarters last year, EU leaders and I agreed to build China-EU partnership of peace, growth, reform and civilization. I believe new progress in China-UK relationship will inject new momentum into the growth of China-EU relationship across the board and make new contribution to the building of China-EU partnership as a whole.
问：伦敦是全球金融中心之一。无论是作为人民币离岸交易中心，还是今后通过实现“伦沪通”，伦敦希望在中国金融市场发展过程中扮演重要角色。您认为在中国金融市场现代化和全球化发展进程中，伦敦能够发挥什么样的作用?
2. London is one of the world's financial centers, and is keen to play an important role in China's financial development, whether by serving as an offshore trading hub for the renminbi or by possibly one day having a trading link between London and Shanghai stock exchanges. What role do you envision London playing in the modernization and globalization of the Chinese currency and stock markets?
答：改革开放37年特别是近几年来，中国金融业改革开放进展显著。中国将继续采取多种措施，推进金融业改革开放，使中国金融市场更加适应金融现代化和全球化发展的要求。
A: The reform and opening up of China's financial sector has made remarkable progress since China embarked on the path of reform and opening up 37 years ago. This has been especially obvious in the past several years. China will continue to adopt multiple measures to advance the reform and opening up of its financial sector so that its financial market can better adapt to financial modernization and globalization.
伦敦是世界金融中心之一，是世界经济血液循环的一个重要泵站。加强同伦敦的金融合作，肯定是互利双赢的选项。中英两国金融合作起步早、发展快、潜力大，走在各领域合作前列。近年来，两国签署了双边本币互换协议，中国在伦敦设立人民币清算行，英国成为亚洲以外首个获批人民币合格境外机构投资者初始额度的国家、首个发行人民币主权债券的西方国家、首个将人民币纳入外汇储备的主要发达国家。这是双方合作的一大亮点。
As one of the global financial centers, London is an important pump station in the world economic lifeline, so to speak. Strengthened financial cooperation with London is definitely a win-win choice for both countries. China-UK financial cooperation started early. It has enjoyed rapid growth, has tremendous potential and leads China-UK cooperation in various areas. We have accomplished much in recent years. Our two countries signed the bilateral currency swap agreement. China set up an RMB clearing bank in London. The UK became the first country outside Asia to obtain the RQFII initial investment quota, the first Western country to issue RMB-denominated sovereign bond and the first major developed country to include RMB into its foreign exchange reserves. This is a highlight in our bilateral cooperation.
伦敦早在2012年就正式启动了“人民币业务中心计划”。经过几年发展，伦敦已经成为最具活力和最重要的人民币交易中心和离岸人民币市场之一。2014年，伦敦的人民币外汇交易规模同比增长143%，人民币存款规模达到200亿元，同比增长37%。
Back in 2012, London officially launched the plan of Center of RMB Business. London has since then become one of the most dynamic and most important RMB trading centers and offshore RMB markets. In 2014, RMB trading in London grew by 143 percent year-on-year and its RMB deposits reached 20 billion yuan, a year-on-year increase of 37 percent.
只要条件具备，中国愿意积极考虑加强两国金融市场互联互通。伦敦可以发挥金融领域的独特优势，在中国金融市场现代化和全球化发展进程中发挥积极作用。
When conditions are in place, China is ready to consider strengthening the connectivity of the financial markets of the two countries. London can leverage its unique strengths in the financial field to get actively involved in the modernization and globalization of China' s financial market.
问：中国企业可能参与英格兰西南部核电站建设。中国政府今年早些时候宣布将支持中国企业在诸如高铁和核电等领域拓展海外市场。未来10年，您希望看到中国企业在全球市场发挥什么样的作用?您认为中国企业拓展海外市场会遇到哪些阻力?是否会导致新的贸易摩擦?中国政府采取国家补贴等方式支持中国企业在海外进行拓展，对其他市场主体是否公平?是否符合中国发展市场经济的目标?
3. Chinese companies are expected to take a stake in the nuclear power plant in southwest England. This is in line with plans announced by your government earlier this year to help Chinese firms in areas such as high-speed rail and nuclear power to expand overseas. What role do you hope to see Chinese companies playing in the global markets over the next decade? Do you think that opposition could derail China's participation in such projects overseas? Will such opposition lead to fresh trade frictions? Is such state-subsidized, state-directed expansion of Chinese industry abroad fair to other market players and in line with China's professed desire for a more market-driven economy?
答：中国对外开放不断走向深入，这既包括中国打开大门吸引外资，也包括中国企业走出国门进行投资。这是一国经济发展到一定阶段必然发生的事情，也是企业要发展壮大必然进行的事情。世界各大企业都走这条路。
A: China is intensifying its reform and opening-up drive, which means both opening up its economy further to attract foreign investment and encourage Chinese firms to make overseas investment. This is natural when a country reaches a particular stage of development and when a company grows bigger, and this is what all big companies in the world are doing.
中国企业发展得益于世界经济，应该为世界经济发展作出贡献。中国已经成为世界制造业大国，突出优势是处于全球产业链中游，高铁、核电、汽车等一大批产业和装备处于国际先进水平，性价比好，符合很多国家需求和承接能力。中国愿同包括英国在内的各国开展多种形式的国际产能和装备制造合作，把各自比较优势衔接起来，实现联动发展。欣克利角核电站项目是中英法三方合作的产物，希望三国企业充分发挥各自优势，确保项目顺利实施，造福英国人民。
Having benefited from the world economy, Chinese companies should contribute their share to world economic development. China has grown into a global manufacturing power, with particular strengths at the middle rung of the global industrial chain. Many Chinese industrial sectors and equipment making capacity, including the building of high-speed railway and nuclear power stations as well as automobiles making, are advanced and competitive internationally, and meet the demand and absorbing capacity of many countries. China is ready to pursue cooperation of various forms with the UK and other countries in international production capacity and equipment manufacturing to synergize our respective strengths and promote each other's development. The Hinkley Point is the product of tripartite cooperation among China, the UK and France. I hope that the companies of the three countries will fully leverage their respective strengths to ensure the successful launch of this project and deliver benefits to the British people.
对外投资遇到一些摩擦属于正常的营商范畴。任何企业只要开展经营活动，不论是在国内还是在国外，总会遇到这样那样的问题。在商言商，不能把企业在经营过程中产生的矛盾政治化，不要带着偏见看待中国企业。企业发展当然要竞争，没有人会把市场拱手让给竞争对手。我们希望这种竞争是良性的、符合市场规律的，而不要设置一些非经济、非市场的“弹簧门”、“玻璃门”。同世界上老牌的大公司对比，中国企业走出去还缺乏经验，在适应各国法律制度、技术标准、市场营销、人员管理、当地文化等方面的能力需要不断提高。在激烈的国际竞争中，中国企业会学到很多，会越做越好。
It is normal for a company to encounter various problems when making investment, whether domestically or overseas. When doing business, one should focus on business. Problems that occur in business operations should not be politicized, and Chinese companies should not be viewed with bias. Competition is necessary for a business to grow, and no one will give away a market to its rivals. We hope that such competition is benign and market-based. There should be no swing doors or glass doors which are placed as non-economic or non-market-based barriers. Unlike established multinational companies, Chinese companies still lack experience in making investment overseas. They need to better adapt to local laws and regulations, technological standards, marketing, human resources management rules, local cultures, etc. Chinese companies will learn a lot and emerge successful in fierce international competition.
中国政府支持企业走出去，但强调要坚持以企业为主体，以市场为导向。中国政府的作用是为企业争取和创造良好的政治环境和公平的制度框架。这是各国政府都会做的事，而且西方国家做得比我们好。即便在市场经济条件下，各国对企业发展都会有形式多样的支持措施，不能简单把这些都看成是国家补贴。中国和西方国家体制不同，由于历史原因，中国企业往往承担了大量社会职能，难以用一种简单的数学公式来计算。
The Chinese government supports Chinese companies in going global. But we believe that this process should be market-oriented with companies being the main driver. The role of the Chinese government is to secure and create a favorable political environment and a fair legal framework for Chinese companies. This is what all governments are doing, and I think the Western countries are doing better than us. Even under market conditions, countries support the growth of their companies in various ways, and such measures should not be all labelled as government subsidy. China's system is different from that of Western countries. Due to historical reasons, Chinese companies perform many social functions, which are hard to measure with a simple arithmetic formula.
未来10年，中国对外投资将持续增长，有关机构测算将超过1.25万亿美元，这将为中英合作提供更多宝贵机遇。两国企业还可以加强在发展中国家的三方合作，把全球价值链的上、中、下游结合起来，共享发展机遇。
In the coming decade, China's overseas investment will continue to grow and is forecast to reach 1.25 trillion U.S. dollars. This will provide more opportunities for China-UK cooperation. The Chinese and British companies may also engage in tripartite cooperation in developing countries to integrate the upper stream, middle stream and lower stream of the global value chain and share development opportunities.
问：英国是首个申请加入亚洲基础设施投资银行的欧洲国家。中国承诺亚洲基础设施投资银行将透明运作，并实施高标准管理。中国将如何确保亚洲基础设施投资银行运作真正做到透明并实现世界一流管理?
4. Britain was the first European country to sign up for membership of the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB). China has promised that the new bank will be transparent and have high governance standards. How will China ensure that the AIIB really will be transparent and have world-class governance?
答：中国提出筹建亚洲基础设施投资银行，目的是推动亚洲地区基础设施建设和互联互通，深化区域合作。
A: China's initiative to establish the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank aims to promote infrastructure development and connectivity in Asia and boost regional cooperation.
亚投行是一个国际性的金融机构，其规章制度和运作要由各成员国协商决定，并不是中国一家说了就算的。中国赞成亚投行充分借鉴现有多边开发银行的经验和做法，在治理结构、业务政策、人力资源管理等方面坚持国际性、规范性、高标准，确保专业运营、高效运作、透明廉洁。在《亚洲基础设施投资银行协定》谈判过程中，57个意向创始成员国秉承开放、包容、专业、透明的原则，达成了高质量的协定文本，53个意向创始成员国已经签署了协定。
The AIIB is an international financial institution whose rules of operation are decided by its members through consultation, not by China alone. We agree that the AIIB should fully draw on the experience and practices of other multilateral development banks, observe high international standards in terms of governance structure, operation guidelines, and human resources management, and ensure its professional and efficient operation as well as transparency and integrity. During the negotiation over the AIIB agreement, 57 prospective founding members acted on the principle of openness, inclusion, professionalism and transparency, and concluded a high-quality agreement text. A total of 53 prospective founding members have signed the agreement.
据我了解，这个协定在很多方面借鉴了现有多边开发银行的做法，同时还有所突破和创新。比如，在治理结构上，亚投行按照多边开发银行的通行做法，设立理事会、董事会、管理层三层管理架构，还根据透明、公开、独立、问责的原则建立了银行监督机制。协定中明确写入了“公开、透明、择优”的遴选管理层原则，是一项区别于现有主要多边开发银行章程的创新之举。又比如，亚投行项目采购面向全球所有国家，不局限于成员国，这同其他一些区域性多边开发银行不同。
I know that this agreement has drawn on the practices of existing multilateral development banks in many ways. It has also made some breakthroughs and explored new ways of operation. For example, in terms of governance structure, AIIB has, with reference to the common practice of multilateral development banks, set up a three-tiered structure, consisting of a board of governors, a board of directors and a management team. It has also put in place an oversight mechanism in line with the principle of transparency, openness, independence and accountability. It is specified in the agreement that the management team will be selected through an open, transparent and merit-based process. This is a new principle not included in the constitution of existing major multilateral development banks. Another example is that the AIIB places no restriction on the procurement of goods and services from any country, and again this is not the case in the other regional multilateral development banks.
目前，各意向创始成员国正按照协定的规定和精神协商制定具体的业务政策和规章。亚投行同现有多边开发银行是合作互补关系，未来将在知识共享、能力建设、联合融资等方面积极开展合作。
The AIIB prospective founding members are working on the specific operation guidelines in accordance with the agreement. The relationship between the AIIB and existing multilateral development banks is a cooperative and complementary one. The AIIB will engage in cooperation with them in terms of sharing expertise, capacity building and joint financing.
中国积极评价并欢迎英国加入亚投行，愿同包括英方在内的各意向创始成员国一道，将亚投行打造成专业、高效的基础设施投融资平台，为亚洲和全球发展事业作出积极贡献。
China commends and welcomes the UK joining into the AIIB. We are ready to work with the UK and all other prospective founding members to build the AIIB into a professional and efficient infrastructure financing platform to contribute to the development of Asia and beyond.
问：作为国际社会一员，中国无论是帮助推进南苏丹和平进程，还是在也门内战中撤离包括英国人在内的外国人员，都发挥着越来越积极的作用。随着中国经济实力和世界影响力持续增长，中国将更多需要在全球范围内寻求保护自身权益。您如何看待未来10年中国在全球事务中的角色变化?中国是否将在调解冲突方面发挥更大作用?中国是否会有朝一日取代美国，成为世界警察，在世界各地建立军事基地以保护自己的利益?
5. China is playing an increasingly active role as a member of the international community, whether by helping bring peace to South Sudan or evacuating foreigners, including Britons, from the civil war in Yemen. As China's economic strength and world influence continue to grow, it needs to make more efforts to protect its rights and interests across the world. How do you see China's role in global affairs changing in the coming decade? Will it play a greater role in mediating conflicts? Will China one day replace the United Statesas the world's policeman and protect its interests by establishing military bases around the world?
答：中国过去是、现在是、将来也必将是世界和平的维护者、共同发展的促进者、国际合作的推动者。随着综合国力不断提升，中国将更加积极地参与国际和地区事务。
A: China was, is and will continue to be a force for world peace, common development and international cooperation. With the increase of its overall strength, China will be able to play a more active role in international and regional affairs.
在今年9月举行的联合国成立70周年系列峰会上，我代表中国政府宣布，设立“南南合作援助基金”，首期提供20亿美元；设立为期10年、总额10亿美元的中国-联合国和平与发展基金；加入新的联合国维和能力待命机制，为此率先组建常备成建制维和警队，并建设8000人规模的维和待命部队。此外，中国还将在未来5年内，向非盟提供总额为1亿美元的无偿军事援助，以支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设。
At the summits commemorating the 70th anniversary of the UN this September, I announced on behalf the Chinese government a series of initiatives, which include: the establishment of an assistance fund for South-South cooperation with an initial pledge of 2 billion U.S. dollars; a ten-year, 1-billion-U.S. dollar China-UN peace and development fund; China joining the newly-established UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad and a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops; the provision of 100 million U.S. dollars in military aid to the African Union in the coming five years to support the building of African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
中国为世界和平与发展作出更多努力，不是想成为所谓的“世界警察”，更不是要取代谁。我们历来主张，各国的事情要由各国人民自己决定，世界上的事情要由世界各国人民商量决定。中国坚持联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，坚持不干涉别国内政，坚持以和平方式解决国际和地区热点问题。中国已经多次宣布，中国奉行防御性的国防政策，中国永远不称霸、永远不搞扩张、永远不会把自己的意志强加于人。
China has been stepping up efforts for world peace and development not because it wants to become a "world cop", even less to take anyone' s place. We are always of the view that a country's affairs should be decided by its own people and the world's affairs should be managed through consultation among the peoples of all countries. China upholds the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. It pursues common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. China follows the principle of non-interference in other country's internal affairs and believes that international and regional hot spots should be resolved by peaceful means. China has declared many times that it pursues adefence policy defensive in nature and will never seek hegemony, engage in expansion or impose its own will on others.
问：中国是世界上最大的温室气体排放国，且已承诺使二氧化碳排放到2030年左右达到峰值，并将降低碳强度——使得每单位经济产出的排放量在2005年的水平上降低60%至65%。作为一个发展中国家，中国一直坚持发达国家应为减少二氧化碳排放承担大部分责任。中国是否会为确保年底巴黎气候变化大会达成一致而改变自己的谈判立场或作出进一步妥协?
6. China, the world's biggest greenhouse gas emitter, has pledged to bring its emissions to a peak by "around 2030" and has also said it would cut carbon intensity - the amount emitted per unit of economic output - by 60 to 65 percent below the 2005 level. As a developing country, China has stuck firmly to the principle that industrialized nations should bear most of the burden when it comes to cutting carbon emissions. Is China prepared to change any of its negotiating positions or offer further compromises in order to make sure that a new global climate change deal is secured in Paris later this year?
答：气候变化是全球性挑战，任何一国都无法置身事外。发达国家和发展中国家对造成气候变化的历史责任不同，发展需求和能力也存在差异。就像一场赛车一样，有的车已经跑了很远，有的车刚刚出发，这个时候用统一尺度来限制车速是不适当的，也是不公平的。发达国家在应对气候变化方面多作表率，符合《联合国气候变化框架公约》所确立的共同但有区别的责任、公平、各自能力等重要原则，也是广大发展中国家的共同心愿。
A: Climate change is a global challenge at which no country can stand on their own. Developed and developing countries have different historical responsibilities for climate change, and different development needs and capabilities. Just like in a car race: it would be neither reasonable nor fair to apply the same speed requirements to cars which have run far ahead and those which have only just left the starting point. Developed countries should do more and lead the way in addressing climate change. This is in keeping with the important principles laid down in the UNFCCC, such as "common but differentiated responsibilities", equity and respective capabilities. This is also the hope of all developing countries.
坚持共同但有区别的责任等原则，不是说发展中国家就不要为全球应对气候变化作出贡献了，而是说要符合发展中国家能力和要求。中国已经成为世界节能和利用新能源、可再生能源第一大国。2014年，中国单位国内生产总值能耗和二氧化碳排放分别比2005年下降29.9%和33.8%。中国向联合国提交了国家自主贡献，这既是着眼于促进全球气候治理，也是中国发展的内在要求，是为实现公约目标所能作出的最大努力。中国宣布建立规模为200亿元人民币的气候变化南南合作基金，用以支持其他发展中国家。
Having said that, the principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities" does not exempt developing countries from contributing their share to global response to climate change. It is only that such contribution should be in line with their capabilities and needs. China is now the world's biggest country in energy conservation and utilization of new and renewable energy. In 2014, China's per unit GDP energy consumption and CO2 emission were cut by 29.9 percent and 33.8 percent respectively from the 2005 level. China's submission to the UN of its nationally intended contributions is aimed at facilitating global climate governance, and also for the sake of China's own development. It represents China's very best effort to help achieve the goals set in the UNFCCC. China has announced the setting up of an 20-billion-RMB yuan South-South cooperation fund on climate change to help other developing countries.
今年年底召开的巴黎大会将对2020年后国际应对气候变化机制作出安排，在全球应对气候变化多边进程中具有重要意义。谈判需要各方展现灵活，但《联合国气候变化框架公约》的基本原则应该得到遵循。各方要最大程度展示诚意，聚同化异，相向而行。中国愿发挥建设性作用，推动巴黎大会如期达成全面、均衡、有力度的协议。
The Paris Conference coming up at the end of this year is a significant milestone in the multilateral process on climate change, as it will set up post-2020 international regimes to tackle this challenge. Progress in negotiations requires flexibility of all parties, yet the basic principles of the UNFCCC need to be observed. Parties should demonstrate sincerity as much as they can, build up consensus and work toward the same goal. China is ready to play a constructive role and work for the timely conclusion of a comprehensive, balanced and strong agreement at the Paris conference.
问：中国处理南海领土主权问题的态度越来越坚定，这让许多邻国感到担忧。中国表示不追求霸权，将始终不渝坚持走和平发展道路。您如何看待许多邻国对此心怀疑虑?对中国在南海的活动可能加剧本地区安全局势恶化的指责，您如何回应?中国当前在南海活动的最终目的是什么?
7. China is being increasingly assertive in pushing its territorial claims in the South China Sea, which has worried many of its neighbors. China also says it will not pursue hegemony and will unswervingly stick to the path of peaceful development. Do you understand why so many of China's neighbors doubt these claims? How do you respond to accusations that China's activities in the South China Sea could be worsening the security situation in the region? What is China's ultimate aim with its current activities in the South China Sea?
答：走和平发展道路符合中国根本利益，也符合地区国家和人民共同期待。中国的这个战略选择没有变，也不会变。长期以来，中国同邻国积极开展互利合作，给地区国家和人民带来了实实在在的利益。新形势下，中国将努力把中国发展惠及周边国家和人民，坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴的周边外交方针，坚持睦邻、安邻、富邻的周边外交政策，落实体现亲诚惠容的周边外交理念。
A: To follow the path of peaceful development serves China's fundamental interests, and is also what regional countries and peoples expect from us. It is a strategic choice made by China that has not changed and will not change. For many years, China's active efforts for win-win cooperation with its neighbors have brought real benefits to countries and peoples in the region. Under the new circumstances, China will strive to deliver more benefits of its development to neighboring countries and peoples. China will continue to pursue friendship and partnership with its neighbors, build a harmonious, secure and prosperous neighborhood and follow through on its policy of amity, sincerity, mutual-benefit and inclusiveness towards its neighbors.
南海诸岛自古以来就是中国领土，这是老祖宗留下的。任何人要侵犯中国的主权和相关权益，中国人民都不会答应。中国在南海采取的有关行动，是维护自身领土主权的正当反应。对本国领土范围外的土地提出主权要求，那是扩张主义。中国从未那么做过，不应当受到怀疑和指责。
The islands and reefs in the South China Sea are Chinese territory since ancient times. They are left to us by our ancestors. The Chinese people will not allow anyone to infringe on China's sovereignty and related rights and interests in the South China Sea. The actions China has taken in the South China Sea are legitimate reactions to safeguard its territorial sovereignty. Expansionism refers to laying claims to land outside one's own territory. China has never done anything like that, so such doubts or accusations are unwarranted.
在各方共同努力下，南海形势总体是稳定的。南海是中国对外经济往来的重要通道。中国比任何国家都需要南海和平、安全、稳定。中国不愿看到南海生乱，更不会主动制造混乱。当前，中国正积极努力同东盟国家在全面有效落实《南海各方行为宣言》的框架下，积极推进“南海行为准则”的磋商。中国将继续同南海周边邻国一道，通过机制对话管控争议，通过谈判协商和平解决争议，积极探索通过合作和共同开发实现互利共赢，维护各国依据国际法享有的南海航行和飞越自由，努力将南海建设成和平、友好、合作之海。有关方面也应尊重地区国家维护南海和平稳定的努力。
With the joint efforts of all parties, the situation in the South China Sea has on the whole been stable. The South China Sea provides important waterways for China's international commercial exchanges. China needs peace, security and stability in the South China Sea more than any other country. China would not want any turbulence there, still less would it be the party to stir up chaos. It is working hard to take forward consultations on a code of conduct in the South China Sea within the framework of fully and effectively implementing the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea. China will continue to work with its neighbors in the South China Sea to manage disputes through institutionalized dialogue, peacefully resolve disputes through negotiation and consultation, actively explore win-win results through cooperation and joint development, and safeguard the freedom of navigation and overflight enjoyed by countries in accordance with international law. We will together endeavor to make the South China Sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation. And the efforts of countries in the region to maintain peace and stability there deserve more respect.
问：中国要求包括英国在内的国际社会协助遣返逃往海外的贪腐嫌疑人。一些国家抱怨中国不愿提供通过司法程序办理驱逐令所需要的证据。在推动遣返嫌疑人问题上，中国将如何改进同其他国家的合作?
8. China has asked for international help from countries including Britain to return corruption suspects who have fled overseas. Some of these countries have complained that China is reluctant to hand over the evidence needed for them to be able to process deportation orders in court. How will China improve its cooperation with foreign countries to get these suspects back?
答：中国司法机关在进行反腐败国际合作时，对具体案件都应该提供确凿证据。中国是一个法治国家，无论是在国内惩治腐败，还是开展反腐败国际合作，都依法办事，坚持以事实为依据、以法律为准绳。
A: China's judicial departments would readily provide solid evidence on specific cases in international anti-corruption cooperation. China is a country with rule of law. It acts according to law and on the basis of facts both in fighting corruption within the country and carrying out international anti-corruption cooperation.
对任何国家来说，腐败都是民众最痛恨的现象。中国开展这方面的国际合作，是要将逃往境外的腐败犯罪嫌疑人缉捕归案，绳之以法。中英两国在共同打击腐败犯罪方面保持着良好合作。双方已经缔结刑事司法协助条约，为合作打击腐败犯罪奠定了法律基础。
In any country, corruption is most detested by the people. International cooperation in this area is aimed at bringing criminal suspects who have committed acts of corruption and absconded overseas back to China to face justice. China and the UK have maintained sound cooperation in jointly fighting corruption and concluded the treaty for mutual legal assistance in criminal matters, which has laid the legal foundation for jointly fighting corruption.
任何国家和地区都不应成为腐败分子和腐败资金的“避风港”，不应成为他们的“避罪天堂”。中国人民最不能理解的是，一些罪行确凿的腐败犯罪分子可以在一些国家逍遥法外，以各种借口逃避法律惩处。由于各国在法律制度等方面存在差异，通过国际合作打击腐败犯罪需要解决一些法律技术性问题。这需要有关各方共同探讨解决方案，特别是要加强反腐败机构和执法机构在个案调查和信息交流等方面合作。相信只要有打击腐败的政治意愿，反腐败国际合作一定能够取得更多成果。
In today's world, no country or place should provide shelter or even safe haven for corrupt elements and their proceeds of crime. What baffles the Chinese people the most is that some corrupt elements for whose crimes there are solid evidence should be able to stay at large in some countries and escape the punishment of the law by citing all kinds of excuses. Due to differences in legal systems between countries, some technical legal matters need to be worked through in international cooperation against corruption. This requires various parties to explore solutions together. In particular, anti-corruption and law enforcement agencies need to strengthen cooperation in investigation and information sharing on individual cases. I am convinced that as long as we have the political will to fight corruption, international cooperation in this field will surely yield more results.
问：中国经济规模和全球影响越来越大。世界各国决策者都越来越需要了解中国当前经济形势。中国政府今年的经济增长目标为7%左右。然而过去几个月里，中国经济形势似乎在恶化。许多投资者和经济学家认为这个目标不太可能实现，这引发了全球金融和商品市场的巨大担忧。您觉得7%的目标能实现吗?中国政府下一步准备采取什么措施来防止经济增速过缓?如何保持中国金融市场稳定运行?
9. China's economy and its global impact are growing bigger and bigger. Policy-makers around the world all need to know about China's economic situation more than ever before. Your government has set a target of growing the economy by around 7 percent this year. However, the economic situation appears to have deteriorated in the last several months, and many investors and economists now see this target as highly unlikely to be reached, creating great concern in global financial and commodity markets. Do you expect to meet this target? What further measures do you stand ready to take in order to keep growth from slowing too much? How to maintain stability of China's financial market?
答：今年上半年中国经济增长7%，符合全年增长预期目标，也是全球主要经济体中增长最快的。一个国家经济增长，有快有慢是正常的，不能说只能加速、不能减速，这不符合经济规律。上半年中国经济增长7%，是在经济总量10万多亿美元的基础上实现的，相当于一个中等国家全年的国内生产总值，带来的增量比前几年两位数增长还要多。
A: The Chinese economy grew by 7 percent in the first half of this year, which is consistent with the growth target of the whole year and is the fastest growth rate among major economies around the world. It is normal that an economy may grow at different speeds in different periods. It would be against the law of economics to aim for ever higher growth without any slowing down. The 7 percent growth in the first half of this year was achieved on the basis of an economy of over 10 trillion U.S. dollars. The increment is already equivalent to the annual GDP of a medium-sized country and still exceeds what was generated by double-digit growth several years ago.
中国同国际市场密切关联，全球经济情况总体偏弱，中国不可能独善其身。中国经济发展有让我们担忧的问题，我们正在抓紧加以解决。我们也担忧世界经济增长乏力，这对各国特别是发展中国家发展不利。
As an economy closely linked to international markets, China cannot stay immune to the lackluster performance of the global economy. We do have concerns about the Chinese economy, and we are working hard to address them. We also worry about the sluggish world economy, which affects all countries, especially developing ones.
历史学家汤因比博士认为，“挑战-应战”是人类文明发展的重要动因。中国经济发展进入新常态，正经历新旧动能转化的阵痛，但中国经济稳定发展的基本面没有改变。中国新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化深入推进，国内市场需求强劲，经济发展具有巨大潜力、韧性、回旋余地，结构性改革正在深化，中国经济的前景十分光明。
Historian Dr. Arnold Toynbee believes that "challenge and response" is an important factor underpinning the development of human civilization. China's economic development is adjusting to the new normal and experiencing growing pains of shifting from old drivers of growth to new ones. Yet the fundamentals of a steadily growing economy have remained unchanged. The new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization that is in full swing has generated strong domestic demand and great potential for future growth. It has also made the economy more resilient and adaptable. All this, coupled with deepening structural reforms, means that China will have very promising economic prospects.
中国正在统筹稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险，加强和创新宏观调控，提高经济发展质量和效益，解决经济发展中存在的不平衡、不协调、不可持续问题，更加注重创新驱动，更加倚重消费拉动。中国利用外商投资政策不会变，我们会健全商业法治，保护知识产权，促进公平竞争。中国将推进“一带一路”建设，积极开展国际产能合作，拉动中国同世界经济共同增长。
We are making coordinated efforts to promote steady growth, continued reform, structural adjustments, and higher living standards, and forestall economic risks. We will enhance macro regulation in creative ways to improve the quality and efficiency of economic development and address the lack of balance, coordination and sustainability in the economy. We will put more emphasis on innovation and consumption-driven growth. The policy on utilizing foreign investment remains unchanged. We will improve the rule of law in the commercial field, protect intellectual property rights, and promote fair competition. We will continue to promote the development of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road and carry out international cooperation on production capacity. Both the Chinese economy and the world economy stand to benefit in this process.
面对近期国际国内金融市场形势变化，我们陆续出台降准降息、完善人民币汇率形成机制等一系列举措。目前，市场风险得到相当程度释放，内在稳定性增强。下一步，中国将按照市场化、法治化方向稳步推进金融改革，培育公开透明和长期稳定健康发展的资本市场，完善风险管理，稳定市场预期，放宽民间资本进入金融领域的限制，更好支持实体经济发展。
In the face of changes in the domestic and international financial markets, we have taken a number of steps including lowering the required reserve ratio and interest rates and improving the RMB exchange rate regime. These measures have helped to largely defuse risks and restore stability in the markets. Going forward, we will deepen market-oriented financial reforms according to law to cultivate an open and transparent capital market that enjoys long-term, stable and sound development. We will improve risk management, stabilize market expectations and make it easier for private capital to operate in the financial sector to better support the real economy.
问：您曾经说，希望有一天中国能够举办足球世界杯，赢得世界杯。您不仅关心这项运动，而且今年早些时候还宣布了中国足球重大改革方案。英国是现代足球发源地。为提高中国足球水平，促进中国足球产业像英国一样取得成功，中国是否能从英国学习和借鉴些什么?您对中国足球的最大期待是什么?
10. You have said that you hope one day China will be able to host the World Cup, and that one day China could win it. You care about the sport enough that you announced big reform plans for Chinese football earlier this year. Britain is the birthplace of modern football. Is there anything China can learn from Britain in raising the level of Chinese football, and making the Chinese football industry as successful as Britain's? What is your biggest hope for Chinese football?
答：足球是世界第一运动，拥有世界上最多的球迷，在中国就有上亿球迷。我对中国足球的最大期待，就是中国足球能跻身世界强队，使足球运动为增强人民体质、激励人们顽强奋斗精神发挥重要作用。中国将深化足球体制改革，以发展青少年足球、改革足球职业体制、加强国际合作、壮大足球产业等目标为抓手，走出一条既符合足球发展规律又适合中国实际的足球发展路子。
A: Football is the most popular sport in the world and there are over 100 million football fans in China alone. My greatest expectation on Chinese football is for the Chinese team to be one of the best in the world and for football to play an important role in making people stronger in body and mind. We will find a new way forward for the sport to flourish in China that is both consistent with the general pattern of football development and fits well with Chinese conditions. We will pursue the goals of strengthening football training for the youth, reforming the professional football system, enhancing international cooperation and boosting the football industry.
英国有深厚的足球文化底蕴和丰富的足球发展经验，英超联赛是影响最大、经营最成功的职业联赛之一。近年来，中英两国在足球领域开展了良好交流合作。2012年，中英校园足球项目启动，英国为中国基层足球教练员提供培训。2013年，两国签署了职业联赛合作意向书，英国球星贝克汉姆成为“中国青少年足球发展及中超联赛推广大使”。上个月，两国共同签署了关于青少年足球“明日之星”计划的谅解备忘录。未来5年，中国将建成2万所足球特色学校，中英两国在足球人才培养、教练和裁判员培训等领域合作潜力巨大。
The UK has a long and proud history of football and a wealth of experience in this sport. The Premier League is one of the most influential and successful professional football leagues in the world. China and the UK have had good cooperation on football in recent years. In 2012, a cooperation program was launched to promote football in schools and the UK started to train Chinese football coaches at the grassroots level. In 2013, the Premier League and the Chinese Super League signed a letter of intent on cooperation, and David Beckham was named "ambassador for the youth football program in China and the Chinese Super League" . Last month, the two countries signed an MOU to produce future stars in football. In the next five years, football training will be introduced to 20,000 Chinese schools, which means huge potential of cooperation between China and the UK in the training of players, coaches and referees.
我相信，中国足球一定会得到更大发展，也将为世界足球运动作出自己的贡献。
I am confident that Chinese football will do better and make its own contribution to world football.

29. 习近平接受俄罗斯主流媒体联合采访
问：您即将对俄罗斯进行国事访问并出席第二十三届圣彼得堡国际经济论坛。今年是中俄建交70周年，您和普京总统多次强调，中俄关系处于历史最好时期。您能否对当前中俄关系作一个综合评价？
Q1. President Xi, you are going to pay a state visit to Russia and attend the 23rd St. Petersburg International Economic Forum. This year marks the 70th anniversary of China-Russia diplomatic relations. You and President Putin have often noted that the relationship is at its best in history. Could you give an overall assessment of the current state of our relations?
答：应普京总统邀请，我即将对俄罗斯进行国事访问并出席第二十三届圣彼得堡国际经济论坛。6年前，我当选中华人民共和国主席后，选择俄罗斯作为首次出访的第一站，同普京总统一道掀开中俄关系新篇章。6年来，我7次到访俄罗斯，每次都见证了两国人民深厚情谊，收获了双方合作丰硕成果。今天，在中俄迎来建交70周年的历史性时刻，我满怀对两国关系美好未来的期待，再次踏上俄罗斯广袤美丽的土地。
Xi: At the invitation of President Vladimir Putin, I will soon pay a state visit to Russia and attend the 23rd St. Petersburg International Economic Forum. After I was elected President of the People's Republic of China six years ago, I chose Russia as the first stop of my first overseas trip. During that visit, President Putin and I jointly opened a new chapter of China-Russia relations. Over the past six years, I have paid seven visits to Russia. Every time I was there, I witnessed the deepening of friendship between our two peoples and the productive outcomes of our cooperation. As China and Russia greet the historic moment of the 70th anniversary of our diplomatic relations, I am glad to pay another visit to your vast and beautiful country with great expectations for a brighter future of our bilateral ties.
经过70年发展，中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系处于历史最好时期。两国政治互信牢固，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互坚定支持。双方建立起完备的高层交往和各领域合作机制，开展了内容丰富、具有战略意义的各领域、全方位合作。两国人民在共同抗击法西斯侵略的伟大岁月中结下深厚的战斗情谊，历久弥坚，中俄关系长远发展拥有坚实民意支撑。双方在国际事务中开展了密切有效的协调和配合，为纷繁复杂的国际形势注入强大正能量。
Indeed, after seven decades of development, China-Russia comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination is now at its best in history. Our two countries enjoy strong political trust and can always count on each other's firm support on issues concerning our respective core interests and major concerns. Guided and underpinned by full-fledged mechanisms of high-level visits and broad-based cooperation, our two sides have conducted substantive, wide-ranging and all-dimensional cooperation of strategic significance. The long-term development of China-Russia relations is blessed by the strong support of our people, who forged a profound friendship as comrades-in-arms in our great, heroic fight against Fascist aggression. Our two sides have also enjoyed close and effective coordination and collaboration in international affairs, thus contributing tremendous positive energy to a complex and fast-changing world.
站在新的历史起点上，中俄关系迎来新的发展机遇。面对两国实现各自发展振兴的共同需要，面对两国人民追求世代友好的共同心声，我们有信心、有能力在过去70年经验成果基础上，推动中俄关系进入更高水平、更大发展的新时代。
Today, China-Russia relations are standing at a new starting point and facing new opportunities for growth. Building on our two countries' shared aspirations for development and revitalization and responding to our two peoples' shared desire for lasting friendship, we have the confidence and capability to bring our relations to a new era of greater development at a higher level, based on our experience and achievements of the past 70 years.
我们要以邻为伴，守望相助，相互给予彼此更加坚定有力的支持；我们要密切合作，深度融通，实现两国发展战略更加紧密的对接，发展利益更加深层次融合，民心民意更加亲密交融；我们要开拓创新，与时俱进，不断扩大完善双方合作新领域，确保两国关系始终具有前瞻性、开创性、发展动能；我们要勇于担当，普惠共赢，在国际事务中发挥更大建设性作用，携手促进世界和平稳定和发展繁荣，惠及世界人民。
Our two countries need to stick together as good neighbors and render each other even stronger support. We need to work closely to seek greater synergy between our development strategies, deeper convergence of our development interests, and closer people-to-people ties. We need to find new areas of cooperation with innovative efforts as called for by the times so that our bilateral relations will always be forward-looking, break new ground, and brim with vigor and vitality. We need to play a more constructive role in international affairs with a great sense of mission and a strong commitment to win-win results, thus jointly promoting peace, stability, development and prosperity for all people of the world.
我期待这次访问俄罗斯期间，同普京总统一道规划两国关系未来发展，推动中俄全面战略协作伙伴关系大踏步迈入新时代。
In my upcoming visit, I look forward to charting the course of our future relationship together with President Putin and to seeing that our comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination will stride into a new era.
问：中国是俄罗斯最大贸易伙伴，中俄双边贸易额今年有望达到什么水平？中俄经贸合作领域有哪些具体项目最具前景？中方将采取哪些举措加强两国地方层面的经贸联系？您如何看待中俄经贸合作中存在的问题？
Q2. China is Russia's biggest trading partner. What is the expectation for the bilateral trade volume this year? What are the most promising projects in economic cooperation and trade? What measures will China take to strengthen sub-national economic ties? How do you view the problems in bilateral business cooperation?
答：经贸合作是中俄关系的重要组成部分，是两国共同发展振兴的重要保障。近年来，双方经贸合作日益深化，成果丰硕，成为国与国互利共赢的典范。2018年，双边贸易额突破1000亿美元，创历史新高。在当前国际贸易和投资低迷、保护主义加剧的复杂形势下，中俄经贸合作取得显著成果更显难能可贵。两国政府部门正采取更加积极的措施，争取将双边贸易额提升到更高水平，推动双边贸易高质量发展。
Xi: Economic cooperation and trade, as a key pillar of our relations, is crucial to the common development and revitalization of China and Russia. Such cooperation has been deepening in recent years, producing fruitful outcomes and setting a prime example of mutually beneficial economic engagement. Our bilateral trade reached a record US$100 billion in 2018. These notable results of our business cooperation are especially valuable given the current complex environment of sluggish global trade and investment and surging protectionism in the world. The government departments of our two countries are taking proactive efforts to bring our trade volume to a higher level and promote high-quality development of bilateral trade.
目前，中俄两国能源、交通、农业、航空航天等领域重大合作项目正稳步实施，中俄原油管道及其复线顺利运营，中俄东线天然气管道即将建成供气，黑河公路桥、同江铁路桥成功合龙，远程宽体客机、重型直升机联合研制工作稳步推进，卫星导航系统合作成果显著。可以说，在双方共同努力下，中俄经贸合作已经步入发展的快车道，前景可期。
Our two countries are steadily implementing major cooperation projects in energy, transportation, agriculture, aviation, space and other fields. The crude oil pipeline and its parallel pipeline are operating smoothly. The eastern route of the natural gas pipeline is nearing completion. The Chinese and Russian sections of the Blagoveshchensk-Heihe Highway Bridge and the Nizhneleninskoye-Tongjiang Railway Bridge have been successfully joined. Steady progress is being made in our joint research and development (R&D) of long-range, wide-body passenger aircraft and heavy-lift helicopter. Cooperation on our satellite navigation systems is highly productive. These are concrete examples to show that, through our joint efforts, our economic cooperation has entered a phase of fast development and great promise.
在地方经贸合作层面，两国地方充分借助2018至2019年中俄地方合作交流年契机，利用中国国际进口博览会等经贸合作平台和“东北-远东”、“长江-伏尔加河”等地方合作平台，积极密切交往，稳步推进经贸、投资等务实合作。双方签署远东地区合作发展规划(2018至2024)和东北-远东及贝加尔地区农业发展规划，在“长江-伏尔加河”平台上不断更新重点投资项目清单，为两国地方结合各自产业发展优势深化合作提供了有效平台。
At the sub-national level, various regions in our two countries have seized the opportunity of the "2018-2019 year of sub-national cooperation and exchange" and harnessed various mechanisms for more frequent interactions and greater economic, trade and investment cooperation, which include the China International Import Expo and other business cooperation platforms, and the Northeast China-Russian Far East and the Yangtze River-Volga River cooperation mechanisms. The two sides have signed a Plan on Cooperation and Development in the Russian Far East Region (2018-2024) and a Development Plan for Agriculture in Northeast China and the Russian Far East and Baikal Regions. Constant updates are being made to the list of key investment projects under the Yangtze River-Volga River mechanism. All these are effective platforms for the two sides to leverage our comparative industrial strengths and deepen sub-national cooperation.
当然，中俄经贸合作中还存在一些具体问题。我想强调，这些问题是伴随两国合作不断推进、相互融合日益深入而产生的。有效解决问题的途径就是创新思路，多措并举，不断拓展合作领域，深挖合作潜力，扩大相互投资、市场准入，提升贸易和投资便利化水平，大力推动农产品贸易、电子商务、服务贸易等领域合作发展，做大双方共同利益“蛋糕”，促进中俄经贸合作提质增量，迈上更高台阶。
Of course, our bilateral business ties are not free from specific issues. But it is worth pointing out that they are the natural result of our deepening cooperation and growing shared interests. The most effective way to address them is to take an innovative and multi-pronged approach to expand cooperation areas and unlock the full potential of our practical cooperation, such as scaling up mutual investment, widening market access, facilitating trade and investment activities, and boosting cooperation in agricultural trade, e-commerce and trade in services. By enlarging common interests, we can upgrade our business cooperation so that it will improve in both quality and quantity.
问：您如何看待中国经济发展前景？
Q3. Could you share some insights on China's economic outlook?
答：新中国成立70年来，特别是改革开放40年来，中国经济发展取得举世瞩目的成就，中国成为世界第二大经济体以及制造业、货物贸易、外汇储备第一大国。2018年，中国经济总量跨过90万亿元人民币大关，人均国内生产总值接近1万美元，经济增速6.6%，位居世界前列，对世界经济增长贡献率约30%。
Xi: The Chinese economy has achieved tremendous growth since the founding of New China 70 years ago, and especially since the start of reform and opening-up 40 years ago. China is now the world's second largest economy, the largest manufacturer, the largest trader in goods, and holder of the largest foreign exchange reserves. In 2018, the Chinese economy passed the RMB90 trillion yuan mark and per capita GDP was close to US$10,000. Our 6.6 percent economic growth rate, one of the highest in the world, meant that China accounted for around 30 percent of global growth last year.
今年以来，面对世界经济增长和国际贸易有所放缓的大环境，中国经济开局良好，主要经济指标保持在合理区间。一季度国内生产总值增长6.4%，连续14个季度经济增速保持在6.4%至6.8%区间，延续近年来平稳增长态势，国内消费继续发挥对经济增长的主引擎作用；就业持续增加，前4个月城镇新增就业459万人，居民收入增长略快于经济增长；物价水平保持总体稳定，居民消费价格温和上涨2%；进出口总额同比增长4.3%，外汇储备保持在3万亿美元以上。同时，中国的经济结构在优化，发展方式在转变，质量效益在提升，稳中向好态势更趋明显。
In spite of a slowdown in global growth and trade, the Chinese economy has had a strong start this year with key economic indicators kept in a proper range. In the first quarter, our GDP grew by 6.4 percent, sustaining its momentum of steady growth in recent years and representing the 14th consecutive quarter of staying in the 6.4 percent to 6.8 percent range. Domestic consumption remained the main driver of growth. Employment continued to expand, with 4.59 million urban jobs added in the first four months of 2019. Personal income grew faster than the economy. Prices were generally stable, with consumer prices posting a modest growth of 2 percent. Total imports and exports were up by 4.3 percent year-on-year, and China's foreign exchange reserves stayed above US$3 trillion. Apart from all this, we were able to improve the economic structure, transform the model of development and enhance the quality and efficiency of economic performance, thus strengthening the momentum of steady and robust growth.
稳中向好、长期向好是中国经济没有改变也不会改变的大趋势。展望未来，中国经济平稳健康可持续发展具备充足支撑条件。一是资源潜力，中国有近14亿人口、9亿劳动力、1.7亿受过高等教育和拥有技能的人才资源、全球最大的中等收入群体、1亿多个市场主体；二是内生动力，中国经济增长主要靠内需拉动，2018年内需对经济增长贡献率达108.6%，其中最终消费贡献率达76.2%；三是发展活力，中国研发投入全球排名第二，约占经济总量2.18%，以战略性新兴产业、分享经济等为代表的新动能不断壮大；四是调控能力，有中国共产党的坚强领导，有集中力量办大事的政治优势，有万众一心、众志成城的民族精神，有改革开放以来持续高速发展积累的雄厚物质技术基础，有巨大发展韧性、潜力、回旋余地，有丰富的宏观调控经验和充足的政策空间，我们完全有条件、有能力、有信心应对各种风险挑战。
The trajectory of our economy toward more steady growth has not changed and will remain so in the long run. Looking ahead, a number of factors will support the steady, healthy and sustainable growth of the economy. These include: First, China's large pool of human resources. China has a population of nearly 1.4 billion, a 900-million-strong workforce, a talent pool of 170 million college graduates and people with professional skills, the world's largest middle-income population, and more than 100 million market entities. Second, China's strong internal driving forces. The Chinese economy is mainly driven by domestic consumption. In 2018, domestic consumption contributed 108.6 percent of economic growth; in particular, the contribution of final consumption was as high as 76.2 percent. Third, China's growing economic dynamism. China's R&D spending ranks second in the world, accounting for around 2.18 percent of its GDP. Emerging strategic industries, the sharing economy and other new economic forces are seeing continuous expansion. Fourth, China's mobilization capability. We have in China the strong leadership of the Communist Party of China, the political advantage that comes from being able to mobilize resources for major undertakings, the spirit of a nation united as one, the solid material and technological foundation built through decades of rapid development in the era of reform and opening-up, the enormous resilience, potential and flexibility in development, and the rich experience in macro-regulation as well as ample policy space. We therefore have all the necessary conditions as well as the capability and confidence to deal with any risks and challenges.
问：今年4月您成功主持召开了第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。您如何看待欧亚经济联盟同共建“一带一路”倡议对接的前景？如何评价北极航道的发展潜力和对实现共建“一带一路”倡议的重要意义？中方将如何参与发展北极航道基础设施建设？
Q4. President Xi, you successfully hosted the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation (BRF) in April. How do you see the future of connecting the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) and the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI)? What is your take on the potential of the Arctic shipping routes and its significance for advancing Belt and Road cooperation? In what way will China participate in infrastructure development for the Arctic shipping routes?
答：中方提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的是聚焦互联互通，深化务实合作，携手应对人类面临的各种风险挑战，实现互利共赢、共同发展。今年4月，第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功召开，各方就相关议题进行深入探讨，完善了合作理念，明确了合作重点，强化了合作机制，就高质量共建“一带一路”达成广泛共识。应我邀请，普京总统连续两届来华出席“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛，中方对此高度评价。
Xi: The BRI put forth by China aims to deepen practical cooperation focusing on connectivity, jointly address risks and challenges facing humanity, and bring about mutual benefit and common development. The second BRF held in Beijing last April was a great success. The participants had in-depth discussions on relevant topics and reached broad-based consensus on promoting high-quality Belt and Road cooperation supported by refined principles, clearer priorities and stronger mechanisms. We are highly appreciative that President Putin has attended both of the two BRFs held in 2017 and this year at my invitation.
共建“一带一路”和欧亚经济联盟都致力于实现各自国家和地区发展振兴，致力于促进区域开放包容合作。双方在诸多合作领域拥有广泛共同利益。2015年5月，我和普京总统共同签署《关于丝绸之路经济带建设和欧亚经济联盟建设对接合作的联合声明》，开启对接合作之路。去年，中国同欧亚经济联盟签署经贸合作协定，这是双方对接合作迈出的重要一步，也是对接合作的重要早期收获，为深化双方经贸合作提供了制度性保障。下一步，我们愿同俄方一道，深化对接合作，相互支持，相互促进，积极推动《欧亚经济伙伴关系协定》谈判，不断提升区域贸易和投资便利化水平，为两国发展振兴和本地区繁荣稳定作出更大贡献。
The BRI and the EAEU are both committed to facilitating the development and rejuvenation of the participating countries and regions and to promoting open and inclusive cooperation in our region. China and Russia have shared interests in many areas of cooperation. In May 2015, President Putin and I signed a Joint Statement on Cooperation on Joint Silk Road Economic Belt and Eurasian Economic Union Projects, kicking off the process to connect the two initiatives. Last year, China signed an agreement on economic and trade cooperation with the EAEU. It was a significant first step and an important "early harvest" in connecting the two initiatives that provides the institutional underpinning for stronger economic cooperation and trade between the two sides. China will work with Russia to foster stronger synergy between the two initiatives in the spirit of mutual support, advance negotiations on an Eurasian economic partnership agreement, enhance facilitation of regional trade and investment, and make a still greater contribution to the development and rejuvenation of our two countries and the prosperity and stability of our region.
开发利用北极航道将为“一带一路”建设同欧亚经济联盟对接合作提供新契机、增添新平台、注入新动力，有利于加强中俄两国同相关各方互联互通和互利共赢。安全和环保对北极通航至关重要。中方鼓励有关中国企业积极参与，为航道商业化运作和当地经济社会发展作出实实在在的贡献。同时，相关工作应该确保绿色环保以及开发利用的可持续性，做到互利双赢、互利多赢，既有利于促进中俄合作，也有利于促进世界经济增长。
Development and use of the Arctic shipping routes will provide new opportunities, a new platform and new impetus for synergizing the BRI and the EAEU. It is also conducive to better connectivity and mutually beneficial cooperation among China, Russia and other relevant parties. Security and environmental protection are crucial in developing these routes. We encourage Chinese companies to take an active part and make practical contributions to the commercial operation of the Arctic shipping routes and local economic and social development. At the same time, environmental standards must be met and sustainability ensured in the development and use of the Arctic shipping routes. We hope there will be win-win results for all involved - a plus for both China-Russia cooperation and world economic growth.
问：您如何评价中俄在金砖国家和上海合作组织框架内的合作，以及金砖国家和上海合作组织的发展前景？
Q5. How do you see China-Russia cooperation within the frameworks of BRICS and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), and the development prospects of the two?
答：10多年来，金砖国家秉持开放包容、合作共赢的金砖精神，不断深化经贸财金、政治安全、人文交流合作，成为国际事务中一支积极、稳定、建设性的重要力量。事实证明，金砖国家代表世界发展的正确方向，合作之路越走越宽，未来充满希望。
Xi: Over the last 10-plus years, BRICS countries have followed the BRICS spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, deepened exchanges and cooperation in economic and financial, political and security, and cultural and people-to-people fields, making BRICS an important force that plays an active, stabilizing and constructive role in international affairs. It has been proven that BRICS represents the right direction of global development, as evidenced by its ever-widening cooperation and promising future.
俄罗斯是金砖国家领导人会晤的发源地。2009年，金砖国家领导人在叶卡捷琳堡举行首次会晤，开启金砖合作的历史篇章。2015年，金砖国家领导人乌法会晤通过《金砖国家经济伙伴战略》，成为五国经济合作的一个里程碑。
Russia is the birthplace of the BRICS Summit. It was in Yekaterinburg that BRICS leaders held their first meeting in 2009, opening a historic chapter in BRICS cooperation. The adoption of the BRICS Economic Partnership Strategy at the 2015 Ufa Summit was another milestone in BRICS economic cooperation.
我们身处不同的大陆，但发展经济、让人民过上更好生活的共同追求，以及在国际和地区事务中发挥更大作用的共同愿望使我们走到一起。
Coming from different continents, BRICS countries are brought together by a shared aspiration to grow our economies, deliver better lives for our peoples, and play a bigger role in regional and international affairs.
当今世界面临百年未有之大变局，金砖国家的发展既有机遇，也有挑战。五国应该更加紧密地团结在一起，平等相待、互帮互助，深化金砖战略伙伴关系，维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益和发展空间，谋求共同发展进步。今年11月，金砖国家领导人将在巴西利亚举行会晤。我希望并相信，五国将共同推动巴西利亚会晤取得丰硕成果，朝着实现第二个“金色十年”愿景迈出新的坚定步伐。
The world today is undergoing major changes rarely seen in a century. This means both opportunities and challenges for the development of BRICS countries. Such a backdrop makes it all the more important for our five countries to stay united in the spirit of equality and mutual assistance, and deepen the BRICS strategic partnership to defend the common interests and development space of emerging markets and developing countries and achieve development and progress for all. We BRICS leaders will meet again in Brasilia in November. I hope and believe that our five countries will work together for a fruitful Summit, and take further, solid steps toward our vision of the second Golden Decade.
中俄两国是全面战略协作伙伴，同为金砖国家重要成员。双方一直在金砖国家框架内保持密切沟通和协调。俄方明年将担任金砖主席国，中方期待同俄方加强协作，在每任主席国接续努力中，推动金砖国家合作不断取得新的更大成果，更好造福五国人民，也为世界和平与发展作出更大贡献。
China and Russia are comprehensive strategic partners of coordination, and important members of BRICS. Our two countries have had close communication and coordination within the BRICS framework. As Russia will take over the BRICS chairmanship next year, China looks forward to strengthening coordination with Russia to make sure that with the sustained efforts of successive chairmanships, BRICS cooperation will yield still greater results to deliver more benefits to the people of our five countries and contribute more to world peace and development.
上海合作组织是中俄双方共同致力于建设新型国际关系的成功实践和有益平台。上海合作组织成立18年来，中俄两国密切协调和配合，共同推动组织不断发展壮大，为地区和平稳定和发展繁荣作出了重要贡献。我认为，两国在上海合作组织框架内的合作主要有以下特点：
The SCO is a successful example of the commitment of both China and Russia to forging a new type of international relations and a good platform for such efforts. In the 18 years since the SCO's inception, China and Russia have maintained close coordination and collaboration. As a result, the Organization has kept growing and made important contribution to peace, stability, development and prosperity in our region. As I see it, China-Russia cooperation in the SCO has the following features:
一是始终着眼弘扬“上海精神”。互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”是上海合作组织的核心理念。中俄双方携手其他成员国，坚决摒弃文明冲突、冷战思维、零和博弈等陈旧观念，构建起不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三方的建设性伙伴关系，树立了相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系典范。
First, we have stayed committed to the Shanghai Spirit. The Shanghai Spirit of mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations, and pursuit of common development is the underlying philosophy of the SCO. China and Russia, together with other SCO member states, have firmly rejected such anachronistic ideas as clash of civilizations, Cold War mentality, and zero-sum game. Instead, we have forged a constructive partnership featuring non-alliance, non-confrontation and not targeting any third party, and set up a paradigm of a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness and justice, and win-win cooperation.
二是始终着眼促进成员国安全和发展利益。谋稳定、促发展是地区国家的共同期待。中俄双方携手其他成员国，全面深化政治、安全、经济、人文等领域合作，妥善应对新的安全威胁和挑战，加强共建“一带一路”同欧亚经济联盟等地区合作倡议和各国发展战略对接合作，推动地区融合发展，为实现地区长治久安和各国发展繁荣发挥了不可替代的作用。
Second, we have stayed committed to advancing the security and development interests of SCO member states. Stability and development are the common pursuit of countries in our region. China and Russia have worked with other member states to deepen all-round cooperation in political, security, economic and cultural fields, make effective responses to new security threats and challenges, and seek greater complementarity between the BRI, the EAEU and other regional cooperation initiatives, and the development strategies of individual countries in pursuit of integrated development of our region. All these efforts have made the SCO irreplaceable for the lasting peace and stability of the whole region and the development and prosperity of individual countries.
三是始终着眼提升上海合作组织国际影响。上海合作组织是欧亚地区重要的建设性力量。中俄双方携手其他成员国，广泛参与国际和地区事务，维护国际公平正义，支持建设开放型世界经济，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
Third, we have stayed committed to raising the global profile of the SCO. Our Organization is an important and constructive force in Eurasia. China and Russia, together with other member states, have engaged extensively in regional and international affairs, upheld international fairness and justice, supported the building of an open world economy, and promoted a fairer and more equitable international order.
上海合作组织顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，具有强大生命力和广阔发展前景。去年青岛峰会上，各方共同描绘了上海合作组织进入历史新阶段的发展蓝图。今年比什凯克峰会是上海合作组织发展的新起点。中方愿同俄方等成员国一道努力，深化团结互信和各领域合作，推动上海合作组织得到更大发展，为国际形势注入更多稳定性和正能量，为构建人类命运共同体作出“上合贡献”。
The SCO, responsive to the call of our times for peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit, enjoys strong vitality and a bright prospect. At last year's Qingdao Summit, we together drew up a blueprint for a new phase in the SCO development. The upcoming Bishkek Summit will therefore become a new starting point in the development of the Organization. China will work with Russia and other member states to enhance unity, mutual trust and cooperation in various areas so that our Organization will keep developing to add more stability and positive energy to the world and make unique contribution to the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
问：您如何评价您同普京总统的个人友谊？
Q6. How would you describe your personal friendship with President Putin?
答：2013年以来，我和普京总统在双边和多边场合会晤近30次，多次通电话和互致信函。我经常愉快地回忆起我同普京总统的每一次交往。我们就最广泛的议题深入交流，既包括国际形势、双边关系、治国理政等重大问题，也涉及文学、艺术、运动等轻松愉快的话题。我们共同乘坐高铁交流，一同观看中俄青少年冰球友谊赛，在巴厘岛庆祝生日，在对方国家重要节日时通电话或致信函相互祝贺，我们还都被对方国家授予最高国家荣誉勋章……普京总统是我交往最密切的外国同事，是我最好的知心朋友，我十分珍视同普京总统这份深厚的情谊。
Xi: Since 2013, President Putin and I have met nearly 30 times on bilateral and multilateral occasions, and talked on the phone and written to each other many times. I keep fond memories of each interaction I had with President Putin. We have had in-depth and most wide-ranging exchanges on both major issues like the international situation, bilateral ties and governance, and more light-hearted topics like literature, art and sports. We have taken a high-speed train ride together, watched an ice hockey friendly between Chinese and Russian youth teams, celebrated his birthday in Bali, exchanged phone calls and congratulatory messages on each other's important festivals, and been awarded medals of the highest honor by each other's countries. I have had closer interactions with President Putin than with any other foreign colleagues. He is my best and bosom friend. I cherish dearly our deep friendship.
我和普京总统的相处，建立在高度互信基础上，这是我们真挚友谊的坚实基础。我们相互尊重、坦诚相待，彼此理解、相互信任。我们对当前世界大势看法相近，在治理国家方面理念相通，肩负两国各自发展振兴的历史责任。最重要的是，我们对中俄关系的战略意义有高度一致的认识，对推动两国关系持续深入发展怀有共同的决心和愿望。我愿同普京总统保持密切交往，共同引领两国关系迈向更高水平，为中国和俄罗斯这两个伟大国家发展繁荣，为两国人民幸福安宁不懈努力。
My engagement with President Putin is built on a high degree of mutual trust. That is the solid foundation of our close friendship. We treat each other with respect, candor, understanding and trust. We share similar views on the international landscape and approaches to national governance, and we both shoulder historical responsibilities for national development and rejuvenation. Most importantly, we share a high degree of consensus on the strategic significance of the China-Russia relationship and therefore the same resolve and desire to deepen and sustain its growth. I look forward to continued close interactions with President Putin. Together, we will take our bilateral ties to new heights and work tirelessly for the development and prosperity of our two great nations and for the happy lives of our peoples.
问：叙利亚局势正趋于稳定。叙利亚政府多次声明愿同有关各方开展合作，尽快重建战争期间受损的基础设施。中方是否有意参与叙利亚重建？近来，委内瑞拉局势持续激化。中方如何评价委内瑞拉局势？美国和伊朗政治对抗持续加剧，波斯湾局势愈演愈烈，中方对解决伊朗核问题的前景如何看待？
Q7. The situation in Syria is stabilizing. The Syrian government has repeated on many occasions that it is ready to work with all relevant parties and restore its war-ravaged infrastructure as soon as possible. Does China intend to take part in Syria's reconstruction? In Venezuela, the situation has flared up lately. What is China's assessment? In addition, the deepening political confrontation between the US and Iran is leading to rising tensions in the Persian Gulf. How does China see the prospects for resolving the Iranian nuclear issue?
答：叙利亚是历史悠久的文明古国，也是中东地区重要国家。近年来，叙利亚局势持续动荡，基础设施遭到严重破坏，人民遭受了深重苦难，我们对此深感痛心。当前，叙利亚局势逐渐好转，政治解决进程向前推进，叙利亚政府和人民也在着手重建家园。中叙两国人民传统友好，中方愿在力所能及的范围内参与叙利亚重建，努力帮助叙利亚人民早日恢复正常生产生活。
Xi: Syria is a time-honored civilization and an important country in the Middle East. It is heart-wrenching for us to see Syria caught in protracted turbulence that has wreaked havoc on its infrastructure and inflicted untold sufferings to its people. Fortunately, the situation there is improving, as the process of political settlement is making progress and the Syrian government and people are starting to rebuild their nation. The Chinese and Syrian people have long enjoyed a traditional friendship. As such, China stands ready to take part in Syria's reconstruction to the best of its capacity and help the Syrian people regain their normal life and work at an early day.
在委内瑞拉问题上，中方的立场是一贯和明确的。我们始终从维护联合国宪章和国际关系基本准则出发，坚持有关问题应该由委内瑞拉朝野在宪法框架内通过包容性政治对话自主协商解决，反对外部干涉和单边制裁，反对使用武力或以武力相威胁。中方愿同国际社会一道，在委内瑞拉问题上发挥积极建设性作用，多作劝和促谈努力，共同维护国际公平正义，维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护地区和平稳定，帮助委内瑞拉早日重回正常发展轨道。
On Venezuela, China's position is consistent and clear. Bearing in mind the importance of upholding the UN Charter and the basic norms governing international relations, China maintains that the issue should be left to the government and opposition of Venezuela to resolve through inclusive political dialogue and independent consultation within the constitutional framework. China opposes external intervention, unilateral sanctions, and the use or threat of force. China will work with the rest of the international community to play a positive and constructive role on this issue, do more to facilitate talks for peace, and uphold international equity and justice, the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, and regional peace and stability to help Venezuela return to the track of normal development as soon as possible.
近期，由于美国对伊朗进行“极限施压”和单边制裁，伊朗核问题乃至整个中东局势持续紧张升级，形势发展令人担忧。伊朗核问题全面协议是多边主义的结晶，对国际核不扩散体系及中东地区和平稳定至关重要，应该得到尊重和完整、有效执行。中俄两国在伊朗核问题上看法和立场高度一致，都希望有关各方保持理性和克制，加强对话协商，为当前紧张局势降温。中俄双方将保持密切协作，推动相关形势朝着好的方向发展，维护联合国权威，维护国际和平和安全，维护国际社会共同利益。中方也会继续坚定维护自身正当合法权益。
With the US imposing maximum pressure and unilateral sanctions on Iran in recent months, tensions have been escalating surrounding the Iranian nuclear issue, and for that matter, in the entire Middle East. Such developments are indeed a cause for concern. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as the embodiment of multilateralism, is crucial for the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and for peace and stability in the Middle East. It must be respected and implemented effectively in its entirety. China and Russia have highly aligned views and positions on the Iranian nuclear issue with both countries calling on all relevant parties to act with reason and restraint and increase dialogue and consultation to deescalate the tensions. China and Russia will stay in close coordination to push for positive developments while upholding the authority of the UN, peace and security in the world, and the common interests of the international community. Besides, China will continue to stand firm for its own legitimate rights and interests in this process.
