131. 习近平在德国《法兰克福汇报》发表署名文章《中德携手合作造福中欧和世界》
中德携手合作造福中欧和世界
——在德国《法兰克福汇报》的署名文章
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
China-Germany Cooperation for the Benefit of China, Europe And the Whole World
A Signed Article by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
On Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung of Germany 
我很高兴在万物复苏的早春时节再次来到德国。	
It is my great pleasure to visit Germany again in the early spring, a time of the revivification of nature.
5年前，我曾经访问德国。那时，欧洲正处于国际金融危机阴霾之下，欧债问题初露端倪，唱衰欧洲之声甚嚣尘上。中国毫不迟疑选择同德国和欧洲加强合作，共克时艰，始终对欧元保持信心，一如既往坚定支持欧洲一体化。	
I visited Germany five years ago. Back then, Europe was under the shadow of the international financial crisis. There were initial indicators of the emerging European debt issue, amid widespread predictions of doom and gloom about Europe. Despite all this, China decided without any hesitation to enhance its cooperation with Germany and Europe in general in an effort to overcome difficulties together with them. China has never lost confidence in the euro and has always firmly supported the European integration.
5年后的今天，欧债问题趋于缓解，欧元依然坚挺，欧洲一体化进程取得了新进展。德国作为欧洲经济的“发动机”和“稳定锚”，正在引领欧洲加快复苏步伐。这些不仅证明了我们当初判断的正确性，更印证了两国互信之深和合作基础之牢。	
Five years later today, the European debt issue has eased off, the euro has remained strong and the European integration has made progress. Germany, the engine and anchor of the European economy, is leading Europe to an accelerated recovery. All these have not only shown we made the right decision back then, but have also attested to the depth of our mutual trust and the solid foundation of our cooperation.
中德合作有着深厚而坚实的基础，这是因为：	
The China-Germany cooperation has been founded on a profound and solid ground for the following reasons:
——中德合作是两大文明的交流对话。中国和德国分处亚欧大陆两端，是东西方两大文明杰出代表。两国数不尽的先贤哲人、深邃的思想哲理、丰富的文学艺术，是双方互学互鉴、交流合作取之不尽、用之不竭的智慧源泉。	
―The China-Germany cooperation represents exchanges and dialogue between two great civilizations. Located at the two ends of the Eurasian continent, China and Germany have each prominently embodied the Eastern or Western civilizations. The numerous ancient scholars and philosophers, profound philosophical thinking, rich and colorful literature and art that our two countries have been proud to have are an inexhaustible source of wisdom for our two countries to learn from, draw upon and share in our exchanges and cooperation.
——中德合作是两个伟大民族的相互学习。尽管中德历史传统和发展轨迹不尽相同，但两个民族拥有很多共同的优良品质，比如勤恳耐劳、谦虚认真、踏实苦干、勇于创新。这为两国人民相互理解、相亲相敬、取长补短提供了得天独厚的条件。	
―The China-Germany cooperation is a learning process for our two great nations. Our two nations have many fine qualities in common, such as diligence, modesty, earnestness and creativity, though we may not have the same history, traditions and development paths. All these have made it possible for our two peoples to better understand, live in amity with, respect and learn from each other.
——中德合作是两个经济奇迹创造者的携手并进。作为全球两大贸易国和两大经济体，中德两国发展早已你中有我、我中有你，谁也离不开谁。无论从产业发展水平、市场规模，还是从需求格局看，中德经济互补性十分突出，合作空间极其广阔。	
―The China-Germany cooperation is also a process in which our two economic miracle creators work hand in hand and make progress together. Both being major trading nations and significant economies, China and Germany have long been economically interdependent and neither is dispensable to the other. Given the industrial development level, the size of the market and the pattern of demands, our two economies are highly complementary and promise a vast space for cooperation.
近年来，中德合作一直领跑中欧合作。每天往返于中国和欧盟之间的15亿美元商品中，近三分之一属于中德。每周，70多个航班连接着两国10多个城市。中欧之间已经开通的3条联运班列中，有2条通往德国的杜伊斯堡和汉堡。每年有超过100万游客来往于中德之间。两国不仅已经成为对方国家在各自地区的最大贸易伙伴，更成为企业投资兴业的最重要目的地。迄今有8200多家德国企业在华安家落户，超过2000家中国企业在德国站稳脚跟。政府磋商、战略对话、法治国家对话等两国政府的60多个对话、合作机制运行顺畅，为中德关系不断取得新进展提供了有力保障。在维护世界和平、地区安全，应对气候变化、粮食安全，推动可持续发展等重大国际问题上，两国也日益紧密地开展沟通和合作。
In recent years, the China-Germany cooperation has led the China-EU cooperation. Each day, the trade in goods between China and Germany accounts for about 1/3 of that between China and the EU which totals US$1.5 billion. Every week, there are over 70 flights connecting more than 10 cities of our two countries. Among the three rail links that have been built between China and Europe, two stretch to Duisburg and Hamburg of Germany respectively. Every year, there are one million tourists traveling between China and Germany. China and Germany have become each other's largest trading partner in Asia and Europe respectively. Furthermore, enterprises of our two countries have made the other country their most important investment destination. Up till now, more than 8,200 German companies and over 2,000 Chinese enterprises have established themselves in each other's country. Our two countries have over 60 dialogue and cooperation mechanisms, including the governmental consultations, strategic dialogue and rule of law dialogue, which have been operating smoothly and have provided a forceful guarantee for continuous progress in China-Germany relations. Our two countries have also increasingly closely coordinated and cooperated with each other in major international issues, such as world peace, regional security, climate change, food security and sustainable development.
当前，全球新一轮科技和产业革命呼之欲出，世界各国争相调整、适应，抓紧实施必要改革。中国决心顺应时代潮流，全面深化改革，抓住实现国家现代化、实现民族复兴的历史机遇。	
A new round of scientific and industrial revolution is just around the corner and countries around the world are trying to adjust or adapt themselves to the development and lose no time in introducing necessary reform measures. Against this backdrop, China has decided to follow the trend of the times, deepen reform comprehensively, and seize the historical opportunity to realize the modernization of the country and the renewal of the nation.
去年11月，中共十八届三中全会就全面深化改革作出总体部署，提出了改革路线图和时间表，涉及15个领域、330多项较大的改革举措。其中，重点是深化经济体制改革，建设统一开放、竞争有序的市场体系，让市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用。我们将深化各方面体制改革，全面推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化。	
Last November, the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China adopted a comprehensive plan on deepening reform in all areas and a roadmap and timetable for the reform, which entails over 330 major reform measures in 15 fields. The comprehensive in-depth reform is designed to focus on the economic structure and put in place a single open market system featuring orderly competition, in which the market will play a decisive role in the allocation of resources and the government its due role properly. We will deepen institutional reform in all fields and go all out for upgrading the country's governance systems and capabilities.
德国推出了“工业4.0”战略，积极推行能源转型，并引领欧洲整固财政，实施结构改革，大力落实“欧洲2020”战略提出的举措，推进欧洲一体化。中德合作将会有更多契合点，获得新动力。中德关系也将在现有高水平基础上，进入一个精确磨合和深度对接的新阶段。	
Germany has introduced the strategy of Industry 4.0 and vigorously optimized its energy mix. It has led Europe in consolidating its public finances. It has conducted structural reform, earnestly implemented measures of the Europe 2020 strategy and promoted the European integration. There will be more areas and new impetus for the China-Germany cooperation. Hence, China-Germany relations will be able to move from the current high level to a new stage of "precision running-in" and "seamless docking".
中德合作的根本在于服务各自国内发展和改善民生。中德合作的未来仍然在于能否为两国人民带来实实在在好处。中国市场和德国技术的结合，无疑将极大促进中欧经济社会发展，给普通百姓生活带来诸多实惠。中国速度和德国质量的联手，将为中欧乃至世界经济创造巨大增长空间。	
Fundamentally, China-Germany cooperation is to serve the domestic development and improve the people's lives of the two countries. Its future lies with the tangible benefits that the cooperation will bring to their peoples. There is no doubt that China's market and Germany's technologies, when working together, will greatly facilitate the economic growth and social development in China and Europe and bring many benefits to ordinary people. In the same vein, China's speed and Germany's quality, when working together, will create a huge space for the economic growth of China, Europe and the world.
作为亚洲和欧洲最主要的经济实体，中德经济加强融合，将意味着亚欧两大增长极的强强联手。这将极大促进亚欧大市场的形成，带动整个亚欧大陆的增长，并对世界经济和贸易格局产生深远影响。	
China and Germany are the most important economies in Asia and Europe respectively. Greater integration of our two economies, or cooperation between strong growth poles in Asia and Europe, will greatly promote the formation of a big Asia-Europe market and the growth of the entire Eurasian continent, and will have a far-reaching impact on the world economy and the world trade structure.
坚持走和平发展道路的中国同德国加强合作，将有利于世界多极化发展，维护和促进世界和平、稳定、繁荣。	
Closer cooperation between China, a country that is committed to the path of peaceful development, and Germany will be in the interest of the formation of a multi-polar world and of world peace, stability and prosperity.
友谊建立在尊重、信任、包容基础上，国家交往亦是如此。当前，全面深化中德关系，缺的不是利益契合和共同目标，而是勇气、胸襟、视野。	
Friendship is based on mutual respect, trust and accommodation, so are state-to-state relations. What is lacking in deepening China-Germany relations in all areas is not converging interests or common goals, but courage, broad-mindedness and vision.
让我们理解和尊重对方人民选择的基本制度和发展道路，照顾彼此核心利益和重大关切。让我们超越简单的买卖关系，以更加创新和开放的思维，赋予中德合作更多战略内涵。让我们通过平等对话和友好协商妥善处理分歧，以更加宏观和长远的眼光为两国关系发展谋划蓝图。让我们共同致力于国际机制和规则的改进和完善，使其更加公正合理、更好适应时代发展和国际社会共同需求。	
Let us understand and respect the basic system and development path chosen by each other's people and accommodate each other's core interests and major concerns. Let us go beyond simple business relations and add strategic dimensions to China-Germany cooperation with a more innovative and open mind. Let us properly handle our differences, if any, through friendly consultations and dialogue on an equal footing, and draw a blueprint for the future development of our bilateral relations with a broader mind and long-term vision. And let us work together to improve the international mechanisms and rules so that they will be fairer and more reasonable and in a better position to meet the needs of the times and the common aspirations of the international community.
只有这样，中德合作的车轮才会越转越快、越转越好。	
This is the only way to enable the China-Germany cooperation vehicle to move faster and smoother.
132. 习近平在比利时《晚报》发表署名文章《中欧友谊和合作：让生活越来越好》
中欧友谊和合作：让生活越来越好
——在比利时《晚报》的署名文章
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Friendship and Cooperation Bring Better Life To Both China and Europe
Article for Le Soir of Belgium by Xi Jinping,
President of The People's Republic of China 
我曾看到两个故事：有位比利时人，从2004年起，一直在中国西南边陲指导当地农民种植咖啡豆脱贫致富。有位中国人，1990年来到比利时，用高超的医术，让众多患者摆脱疾病的困扰。	
I remember reading two stories. One is about a young Belgian who has since 2004 taught farmers in China's southwest interior region to grow high-quality coffee to increase their income. The other one is about a Chinese doctor who came to Belgium in 1990 and has cured many patients.
这样的故事还有很多很多，让我感受到中欧友谊和合作的强大力量。这种力量从2000年前的古丝绸之路走来，让亚欧大陆上不同肤色、不同语言、不同信仰的人们携起手来，共同走向更加美好的生活，这是中国人民和欧洲各国人民的共同愿望。	
From these two and many other stories, I can feel the strength of China-Europe friendship and cooperation. Such strength was first created by the Silk Road 2,000 years ago, which has bound peoples of different colors, languages and beliefs on the Eurasian continent in a common pursuit of better life, which is a shared desire of both Chinese and Europeans.
正是带着这样的愿望，我对比利时进行国事访问，并访问欧盟总部。	
It is with such a desire that I am paying a state visit to Belgium and a visit to the EU headquarters.
中国同比利时建交43年来，两国关系取得长足发展。双边贸易比建交之初增长了1000多倍，比利时已成为中国在欧盟的第六大贸易伙伴。近年来，两国相互投资持续增长。在过去5年中，中国对比利时直接投资增长了近10倍，为当地创造了大量就业。双方成功举办了“欧罗巴利亚－中国艺术节”、中比建交40周年等一系列文化交流活动，两国人民友谊进一步加深。	
China-Belgium relations have come a long way in the past 43 years since the forging of diplomatic relations. Bilateral trade has grown by more than 1,000 times, making Belgium China's sixth largest trading partner in the EU. Mutual investment has grown in recent years. China's direct investment in Belgium has grown nearly 10 folds over the past five years, creating many jobs locally. The successful Europalia China Art Festival and cultural activities marking the 40th anniversary of China-Belgium diplomatic relations have brought our two peoples closer.
中欧建立全面战略伙伴关系以来，中欧双方贸易额在10年间翻了两番，2013年达到5591亿美元。现在，双方每年人员往来达到550多万人次，互派留学生27万多人。这些数字的背后，是中欧友谊和合作给双方人民带来了更丰富的商品、更多的工作岗位、更好的学习机会。	
Since establishment of the China-EU Comprehensive Strategic Partnership, two-way trade has quadrupled, reaching US$559.1 billion in 2013. Every year, 5.5 million mutual visits are made by Chinese and Europeans. The number of Chinese students in the EU and students from EU countries in China has exceeded 270,000. These figures show that China-Europe friendship and cooperation have provided our peoples a greater variety of goods, more jobs and better educational opportunities.
我期待着通过这次访问，深化互利共赢的中欧关系，让中欧友谊和合作给中欧各国人民带来更多福祉。	
I hope that my visit will deepen the win-win relations between China and Europe so that our friendship and cooperation will deliver more benefits to the Chinese and European peoples.
今天，中国和欧洲都处在各自发展的关键阶段。中共十八届三中全会作出了全面深化改革的战略部署。15个领域、330多项改革举措的具体落实办法已经或正在出台。13亿中国人民正在全力以赴为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。欧洲也正在改革发展的道路上奋力前行。欧盟进行了大刀阔斧的结构性改革，欧洲各国人民付出了艰苦努力，复苏的春意已经开始驱散欧洲经济的寒冬。	
Today, both China and Europe are at an important stage of development. A strategic decision was made at the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China to comprehensively deepen China's reforms, and over 330 implementing steps covering 15 sectors have been introduced or are in the works. The 1.3 billion Chinese people are endeavoring to realize the Chinese Dream of great national renewal. Europe is also on a path of reform and development. With massive structural reform introduced by the EU and strenuous efforts made by the European people, the spring of recovery is dispersing the winter chill in the European economy.
新形势赋予中欧友谊和合作新的发展机遇。中欧是发展之路上的利益共同体，中国将继续从战略高度看待欧洲，支持欧洲一体化建设，相信欧洲各国人民也将同样支持中国人民走好自己所选择的适合中国国情的发展道路。	
The new era presents new opportunities for China and Europe to boost their friendship and cooperation. China and Europe share common interests in pursuing development, and China will continue to view Europe as a strategic partner and support European integration. We believe that the European people will also support the Chinese people in pursuing a development model suited to China's national conditions.
去年11月，双方发表了《中欧合作2020战略规划》。中国愿意同欧洲一道，一张蓝图干到底，以落实《规划》为主线，全面加强贸易、投资、金融、高技术、新能源、新型城镇化等领域交流合作，让中欧友谊和合作为各自发展提供更强助力，也为双方人民带来更多实利。	
The Strategic Agenda 2020 for China-EU Cooperation was released last November. China will work with the EU to turn this blueprint into reality. In pursuing this strategic agenda, the two sides will step up cooperation and exchanges in trade, investment, finance, high technology, new energy and new type of urbanization. This endeavor will enable our friendship and cooperation to spur the development of both sides and bring more tangible benefits to the two peoples.
新形势赋予中欧友谊和合作新的战略内涵。中欧人口和经济总量分别占到世界四分之一和三分之一，在经济全球化、世界多极化、社会信息化蓬勃发展的今天，中欧关系的影响已经超越双边，越来越具有全球性战略意义。	
The new era adds new strategic dimensions to China-Europe friendship and cooperation. Together, China and the EU account for a quarter of the world's population and one third of the global economy. Amidst the deepening of economic globalization, the growing trend towards multi-polarity and extensive IT application, China-EU relations have gone beyond the bilateral context and acquired increasing global and strategic significance.
——中国和欧洲是维护世界和平的两大力量。中国是联合国安理会五个常任理事国中派遣维和军事人员最多的国家。欧盟是全球最大对外援助方。双方在伊朗核、中东、反海盗等问题上进行了有效合作。我们要携起手来，同全世界所有爱好和平的人们一起，建设地球和平家园。	
- China and Europe are two major forces for upholding world peace. China is the largest contributor of peacekeepers among the Permanent Members of the UN Security Council, and the EU is the largest aid provider in the world. We have engaged in effective cooperation on the Iranian nuclear issue, the Middle East and anti-piracy. Let us join hands and work with all peace-loving people in the world to ensure peace on our planet.
——中国和欧洲是促进共同发展的两大市场。作为最大发展中国家，中国经济增长对世界经济增长的贡献率接近30%。作为最大经济体，欧盟国内生产总值达到16.7万亿美元。中欧要共同坚持互利共赢，坚持市场开放，致力于发展开放型世界经济，为全球经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长提供强大动力。	
- China and Europe are two markets that promote common development. As the largest developing country, China contributes close to 30% of world economic growth. As the largest economy, the EU's GDP has reached US$16.7 trillion. We should jointly pursue win-win cooperation, open markets and foster an open world economy so as to create good momentum and ensure strong, sustainable and balanced growth of the global economy.
——中国和欧洲是推动人类进步的两大文明。中国和欧洲都是东西方文化重要发祥地和杰出代表，几千年来相互促进、相映生辉。我们要共同坚持文明多样性，引领文明互容、文明互鉴、文明互通的世界潮流，为人类文明共同进步作出贡献。	
- China and Europe are two civilizations that promote human progress. For several thousand years, China and Europe, the birthplaces of the Eastern and Western cultures shining with brilliance, have enriched each other through interactions. We should uphold the diversity of civilizations and advance global trend of inclusiveness, mutual learning and interaction between civilizations to promote progress of all civilizations.
新形势下，中欧友谊和合作更加需要平等对话和交流。中国和欧洲的国情和发展阶段不同，中欧人民不可能在所有问题上都想法一致。我们所处的，既是同舟共济的时代，也是个性彰显的时代，既是机遇前所未有的时代，也是挑战前所未有的时代。	
In the new era, more equal dialogue and exchanges are called for to boost China-Europe friendship and cooperation. Given their different national conditions and stages of development, we do not expect China and Europe to see eye to eye on all issues. The time we live in is both a time of cooperation and a time of distinctive dynamism. It is a time of both unprecedented opportunities and challenges unmet before.
“智者求同，愚者求异。”中欧要本着相互尊重、平等相待、求同存异、合作共赢的态度去加强对话和沟通，寻求利益最大公约数，共享机遇，共迎挑战。	
"The wise seeks common ground while the unwise clings to differences". China and Europe should respect each other, treat each other as equals, seek common ground while shelving differences, and pursue win-win cooperation. By doing so, we will enhance our dialogue and engagement, maximize common interests, share opportunities and jointly meet challenges.
险滩和礁石阻挡不了奔腾入海的河流，我相信问题和分歧也阻挡不了中欧友谊和合作的前进之路。	
Rapids and rocks can never stop a river from flowing into the sea. Likewise, I believe that no issues or differences can stop our friendship and cooperation from growing.
比利时是欧盟总部所在地，被称为“欧洲心脏”。“心脏”脉动越有力，就越能为中欧合作输入更多血液。	
Belgium, where the EU headquarters are located, is known as the "heart of Europe". The more strongly the heart beats, the more energy it will create for China-Europe cooperation.
中欧友谊和合作是时代的选择，是中欧18亿人民的选择。“星徽”和“好好”，两只憨态可掬的大熊猫能够不远万里，从中国的“天府之国”落户到比利时的“天堂公园”，就是这个选择的明证。它们的名字，喻义光明和美好，传递了我们对于中欧友谊和合作的自信和祝愿。	
China-Europe friendship and cooperation is the choice made by the times and by the 1.8 billion Chinese and Europeans. This choice is illustrated by Xing Hui and Hao Hao, two cute pandas who have travelled half way across the world to Belgium from the "land of abundance" in China and settled down in the Pairi Daizi Zoo. Their names, meaning light and goodness, demonstrate our confidence in and best wishes for China-Europe friendship and cooperation.
我相信，中欧关系的未来更加光明，也让我们的生活更加美好。	
I am convinced that China-Europe relations will have an even brighter future and make life even better for all of us.
133. 习近平在法国《费加罗报》发表署名文章《特殊的朋友 共赢的伙伴》
特殊的朋友 共赢的伙伴
——在法国《费加罗报》的署名文章
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Special Friends, Win-win Partners
Article for Le Figaro by H.E. President Xi Jinping of
The People's Republic of China 
从今天起，我将对法国进行为期3天的国事访问。今年是中法建交50周年。我选择这一时机访法，是为了总结过去、传承友好、继往开来，推动中法关系更上一层楼。	
My three-day state visit to France will start today. This year marks the 50th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and France. I have choosen this timing to underscore my desire to review our achievements, renew our friendship, chart our future so as to bring the relationship to a new high.
50年前，毛泽东主席和戴高乐将军以卓越的战略眼光和非凡的政治勇气，推动中法两个伟大国家实现握手，为国际社会树立了不同社会制度国家和平共处、合作共赢的典范，对国际战略格局产生的重大深远影响延续至今。
Fifty years ago, in a display of extraordinary strategic vision and unparalleled political courage, Chairman Mao Zedong and General Charles de Gaulle moved our two great countries to a handshake, setting a fine example in the world for countries with differing social systems to live peacefully together and engage in win-win cooperation. The major and far-reaching impact of the event on international strategic landscape has continued to live on.
——50年来，两国领导人坚持从全球视野出发，秉持独立自主精神，把发展中法关系放在各自对外关系的优先位置，开创了大国良性互动的先河。法国是第一个同新中国建立大使级外交关系的西方大国，也是第一个同中国建立全面战略伙伴关系和机制性战略对话的西方大国。	
- The past 50 years saw the leaders of our two countries make stronger China-France relations a priority in the respective diplomatic agenda, acting independently and with a global vision, and opening a new page for sound interactions between the world's major countries. France is the first major Western country to have established diplomatic relations with New China at the ambassadorial level. It is also the first major Western country to have established the comprehensive strategic partnership and institutionalized the strategic dialogue with China.
——50年来，两国开展了多项开拓性合作，不断丰富中法关系战略内涵。法国是第一个同中国开展民用核能合作的西方国家、第一个同中国签订政府间科技合作协定的西方国家、第一个同中国开辟直航航线的西方国家。现在，每周有近60次航班往返于两国之间。
- The past 50 years saw our two countries conduct multiple pioneering cooperation and constantly enrich the strategic content of bilateral relations. France is the first Western country to engage in civil nuclear energy cooperation with China, the first Western country to sign an inter-governmental science and technology cooperation agreement with China, and the first Western country to open direct flights with China. Now there are nearly 60 flights operating between China and France each week.
——50年来，两国人文交流从未间断，推动着中法两大灿烂文明的交流互鉴，拉近了两国民众心与心的距离。法国是第一个同中国互办文化年、互设文化中心的国家，也是第一个同中国开展青年交流的西方大国。中国有10万青少年学习法语。在法国也有越来越多的人学习汉语，目前已经有4.5万，这个数字还在不断增长。	
- The past 50 years saw our two countries promote uninterrupted cultural and people-to-people exchanges, bringing the two splendid civilizations together and shortening the distance between the two peoples in their hearts. France is the first country to exchange with China in hosting the cultural year and setting up cultural centers. It is also the first major Western country to conduct youth exchanges with China. Right now, the number of young Chinese studying French totals over 100 thousand, while the number of French studying Chinese over 45 thousand. That number is still increasing steadily.
孔子曰：“五十而知天命。”中法关系50年的发展历程，为双方维持特殊友谊、走好共赢道路凝聚了许多有益经验和启迪。双方都认为，互尊互信、坦诚相待是中法关系保持健康稳定发展的必要前提。敢为人先、与时俱进是中法关系始终走在中国同西方国家关系前列的重要法宝。互利共赢、互惠共容是中法关系能够长期造福两国人民的根本出发点。独立自主、求同存异是中法在国际事务中实现协调和配合的精神基础。同舟共济、面向全球是中法在国际风云变幻中始终致力于人类和平与发展事业的不懈追求。	
Confucius once said, "at the age of 50, one knows the mandate of Heaven." China-France relations of the past 50 years have taught us much useful experience and inspirations to maintain our special friendship and make further progress to our mutual benefit. It is our shared belief that mutual respect, mutual trust and treating each other with sincerity are the necessary precondition for the sound and stable growth of China-France relations. Taking pioneering steps while keeping pace with the times is a key asset for China-France relations to always stay ahead in China's relations with Western countries. Mutual benefit, win-win and inclusiveness are the basic point of departure to ensure that the relationship can deliver long-term gains to the two peoples. Acting independently but ready to seek common ground while shelving differences is the philosophical foundation for the two countries to coordinate and cooperate in international affairs. And taking on global challenges as fellow passengers sharing a common stake is the abiding commitment of the two countries to peace and development of mankind despite international vicissitudes.
中国人讲“知行合一”，法国人讲“打铁方能成铁匠”，都强调要把思想转化成为行动。在3天的访问中，我将同奥朗德总统等法国领导人充分交换意见，并将共同发表新的联合声明和中长期合作规划。我相信，我们一定能够达成新的重要共识。我认为，中法作为全面战略伙伴，要互尊互信、协作创新，继续引领中欧关系和中国同西方国家关系发展。
The Chinese value "combining learning with practice", while the French believe that "forging iron makes one a blacksmith". Both highlight the need to turn idea into action. During the three-day visit, I will exchange views extensively with President François Hollande and other French leaders. We will issue a new joint statement and a plan for medium- and long-term cooperation. I believe we will reach some new consensus that is important. China and France, as each other's comprehensive strategic partner, ought to treat each other with mutual respect and mutual trust, work closely and innovatively, and continue to take the lead in growing China-EU relations and China's relations with Western countries.
作为联合国安理会常任理事国，中法都肩负着维护世界和平、促进共同发展的历史使命。为推动世界多极化和国际关系民主化，推动国际热点问题纳入和平解决轨道，携手应对恐怖主义、气候变化等全球性挑战，双方有能力、有智慧提出好的倡议和方案。	
As permanent members of the UN Security Council, China and France have on their shoulders the historical mission of upholding world peace and promoting common development. They have the capability and wisdom to make good proposals and good initiatives to advance world multi-polarity and democracy in international relations, to bring international hotspot issues onto the track of peaceful settlement and to jointly tackle terrorism, climate change and other global challenges.
作为世界两大重要经济体，中法利益契合点多，互补性强。双方要充分释放合作潜力，通过联合研发、联合投资、共同开发第三国市场等方式，深化两国核能、航空、航天、汽车等传统合作领域利益融合，在农业食品、金融、数字化等新领域打造合作新亮点。	
As the world's two major economies, China and France have many converging interests and a high degree of complementarity. They need to unlock their cooperation potential more fully, deepen their integration of interests in such traditional areas of cooperation as nuclear power, aviation, space and automobile by exploring joint R&D, joint investment and joint development of the market of third countries, and create new bright spots of bilateral cooperation in agriculture, foodstuff, finance, digitalization and other new areas.
中法都主张兼收并蓄，双方将积极探讨提高两国人文交流水平的新途径，深化两国民众相互认知。双方将继续举办民众喜闻乐见的活动纪念中法建交50周年，扩大互派留学生和互访游客规模，为便利人员往来采取新举措。	
Both as advocates of inclusiveness, China and France will actively explore new approaches to enhanced cultural and people-to-people exchanges so as to deepen the mutual understanding of the two peoples. The two sides will continue to hold popular activities to commemorate the 50th anniversary of China-France diplomatic relations, encourage greater exchanges of students and tourists, and take new steps to facilitate personnel visits.
当前，中国已经进入全面深化改革和扩大开放的发展新阶段，正在通过推进新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化，致力于实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。法国也在积极推动结构性改革，致力于保增长、提高竞争力、扩大就业，实现新的法国梦。中法都是富有改革精神的民族，只要双方抓住机遇，相互支持，合作之路必将越走越宽，中法关系必将迈向下一个辉煌的50年。	
China has now entered a new development stage of comprehensively deepening reform and opening still wider to the outside world. The country is committed to realizing the "two centenary" goals and the Chinese dream of great renewal of the Chinese nation by advancing the new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization. France, on its part, is stepping up its structural reform while working to ensure growth, boost competitiveness, expand employment and fulfill the new French dream. Both China and France are reform-minded nations. As long as we seize the opportunities and support each other, our path of cooperation will yield even richer fruits and China-France relations will embrace yet another 50 years of proud success.
来法国前，我已经访问了荷兰，接下来还将访问德国、比利时、欧盟总部。我在今年开春之际抽出11天时间访问欧洲，是因为我高度重视欧盟和中欧关系，坚定支持欧洲一体化建设。当前，中欧都处于各自发展的关键阶段，中欧关系面临新的发展机遇。双方要不断深化金融、基础设施建设、新型城镇化、新能源、科技创新、节能环保等领域互利合作，加速中欧投资协定谈判步伐。	
Before coming to France, I have already visited the Netherlands and will soon go to Germany, Belgium and the EU headquarters. The reason I have decided to spend 11 days to visit Europe at the beginning of the spring season is because I attach great importance to the EU and China-EU relations and I am a staunch supporter of European integration. Both at the crucial stage of their respective development, China and the EU are now faced with new opportunities to develop their relations. The two sides need to deepen their win-win cooperation in finance, infrastructure development, the new type of urbanization, new energy, scientific and technological innovation, energy conservation, environmental protection and other areas, and move still faster in their negotiations for a China-EU investment treaty.
与此同时，要相互尊重彼此发展道路，坚持通过平等对话和友好协商的方式妥善处理贸易纠纷，实现中欧关系平稳健康发展。这不仅将造福中欧人民，也有利于促进世界和平与繁荣，发挥超越中欧、更具全球意义的重要影响。	
At the same time, we should respect each other's choice on development path, properly manage our trade disputes through equal-footed dialogue and friendly consultations, and achieve a steady and healthy development of China-EU relations. This will not just benefit our peoples, but contribute to world peace and prosperity, and exert an influence that goes beyond China and Europe and assumes a global significance.
朋友越走越近，良言越说越亲。我期待着同法国政府以及各界朋友深入交流，寻求共赢之道。	
Affinity grows as exchange of visits increases. I look forward to in-depth exchanges with the French government and friends from across the French society for win-win results.
122. 习近平在澳大利亚《澳金融评论报》发表署名文章《开创中澳关系更加精彩新篇章》
澳大利亚，这片神奇的大陆，有着优美独特的风光、蓬勃发展的经济、富于活力的人民、多元共生的文化，深深吸引着世界的目光。	
The magnificent land of Australia has attracted worldwide attention with its exotic, charming landscape, dynamic economy, vibrant people and diversified culture.
自1988年以来，我已经4次访问澳大利亚。每次访问都让我耳目一新，也让我深深感受到中澳两国人民的深厚友谊。我期待着第五次踏上这片土地，对澳大利亚进行国事访问，并出席在布里斯班举行的二十国集团领导人第九次峰会。
I have visited Australia four times since 1988. Each time left me with a new ­understanding of the country and a deep impression of the profound friendship between the Chinese and Australian people. I look forward to my fifth trip to this land during which I will pay a state visit to Australia and attend the ninth G20 summit, in Brisbane.
“志合者，不以山海为远。”中国和澳大利亚虽然远隔重洋，但历史和现实的纽带将我们紧紧连在一起。建交42年来，中澳关系走过了不平凡的历程，两国成为好朋友和战略伙伴，两国人民从中受益良多。	
As a Chinese saying goes: "Even mountains and seas cannot distance people with common aspirations." Despite the geographical distance between us, China and Australia have been closely linked by history and reality. Since the establishment of ­diplomatic relations 42 years ago, our ­relations have traversed an extraordinary journey, making us good friends and strategic partners and bringing real benefits to our two peoples.
中澳高层及各级别交往密切，政治互信不断加深。中澳建立了总理年度定期会晤机制，以及外交与战略对话、战略经济对话等30多对政府间磋商机制，议会、政党、军事交流活跃，在多边事务中保持良好沟通和协调。	
China and Australia have maintained close contacts at both the top and other ­levels and deepened mutual trust. We have established over 30 inter-governmental consultation mechanisms, including the annual meeting between our prime ­ministers, the foreign and strategic dialogue and strategic economic dialogue. There have been active exchanges between our legislatures, political parties and militaries, and we have maintained good communication and co-ordination on multilateral issues.
中澳经贸等务实合作成果丰硕，利益交融不断加深。42年来，中澳双边贸易规模扩大了1500多倍。中国是澳大利亚第一大贸易伙伴、第一大出口市场、第一大进口来源地。中国每进口100吨铁矿石，就有54吨来自澳大利亚。澳大利亚出口每收入3澳元，就有1澳元来自中国。澳大利亚的优质乳、肉制品、葡萄酒也越来越多地摆上中国民众的餐桌。	
China and Australia have achieved ­fruitful results in practical business co-operation and deepened converging interests. Bilateral trade has expanded 1500-fold in the past 42 years. China is now Australia's ­largest trading partner, export market and source of imports. For every 100 tonnes of iron ore imported to China, 54 tonnes come from Australia. For every three dollars ­Australia earns from export, one dollar comes from China. Meanwhile, the ­premium dairy, meat and wine products of Australia are ­increasingly served at the ­dining tables of Chinese households.
中澳人文交流蓬勃发展，友好情谊不断加深。中澳成功互办文化年，“澳大利亚热”和“中国热”在两国持续升温。中国是澳大利亚第一大旅游收入来源国，澳大利亚稳居中国第二大海外留学目的地。2013年两国人员往来突破150万人次，超过20万中国学子在澳大利亚求学。	
China and Australia have engaged in vibrant people-to-people exchanges and deepened bilateral friendship. The two countries have successfully held in each other's side the year of culture, which has fostered growing "Australia zeal" in China and "China zeal" in Australia. China is the largest source of tourist receipts for Australia while Australia is the second-largest destination of outbound Chinese ­students. In 2013 the mutual visits between our two countries exceeded 1.5 million, and more than 200,000 Chinese students are studying in Australia.
在中澳关系发展进程中，留下了许多两国友好交往的佳话。1991年，被誉为“光明使者”的澳大利亚眼科大夫格拉翰姆访问中国，为多名眼疾患者进行手术，使他们重见光明。2009年和2013年，当澳大利亚维多利亚州、新南威尔士州等地遭受严重山林火灾时，中方迅速向澳方提供火场卫星数据，向救灾行动施以援手。正是两国人民在交往中奏响了一个又一个的动人音符，才汇聚成今天中澳友好的华彩乐章。	
The growing China-Australia relations have offered us many widely told stories. The Australian eye specialist Peter ­Graham, known as a "Lightbringer", ­visited China in 1991, during which he performed operations for several patients with eye ­disease and restored their eye sight. In 2009 and 2013 when Victoria and New South Wales of ­Australia were hit by severe bush fires, the Chinese side lent a helping hand by ­providing prompt satellite data about the fires. It is with these heartwarming notes our people have struck in their exchanges that we have composed a splendid movement about China-Australia friendship.
“求木之长者，必固其根本；欲流之远者，必浚其泉源。”中澳分别地处北半球和南半球，分属东西方文化，两国关系能达到今天的高度，最重要的经验是双方遵循相互尊重和平等互利的原则，以对话增进互信，以合作实现共赢，以交流筑牢友谊。这是中澳关系发展的正道，经过了历史检验，更得到了两国民众认可。	
As an ancient Chinese philosopher wrote, "A tree has to strike a firm root before it can flourish. A river has to have a fully dredged source before it can flow unceasingly far." The most important reason that China and Australia, an Eastern culture in the Northern Hemisphere and a Western culture in the Southern, have been able to bring bilateral relations to the current height is that they have followed the principles of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, ­promoted mutual trust through dialogue, sought win-win progress through co-operation and cemented friendship through exchanges. This is proven to be the right path for the development of China-Australia relations, which has withstood the test of history and won the support of the people.
当前，中国正在全面深化改革和扩大开放、全面推进依法治国，为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标和中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。澳大利亚同样在加快经济结构调整和产业升级，建设更加强大繁荣的国家。在国际和地区问题上，两国交集持续扩大，共识不断增加。可以说，中澳合作内生动力充足，战略意涵突出，现实基础深厚，发展前景广阔。
At the current stage, China is comprehensively deepening reform and opening up, promoting rule of law on all fronts and ­making relentless efforts to achieve the "two centenary goals" (i.e. doubling our GDP and per capita urban and rural income of 2010 and completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all aspects by 2020, and turning China into a harmonious ­modern socialist country that is strong, prosperous, democratic and culturally advanced by the middle of the century) and the Chinese dream of great renewal of the Chinese nation. Likewise, Australia is speeding up economic restructuring and industrial upgrading to build a stronger and more prosperous country. On international and regional issues, our two countries have increasingly broader common ground and common understanding. Suffice it to say that with strong internal strength for growth, great strategic significance and a solid foundation, China-Australia co-operation will enjoy an even brighter prospect.
我期待通过这次访问，同澳大利亚领导人以及各界朋友深入交流，挖掘合作潜力，厚植友好情谊，携手开启中澳关系更加精彩的新篇章。	
I look forward to having an in-depth exchange of views with the Australian ­leaders and friends of all sectors during my forthcoming visit, to further tap into our ­co-operation potential, deepen friendship and jointly write a more splendid new ­chapter in China-Australia relations.
我们要增进相互理解，巩固互信纽带。中澳增进互信，要做到和而不同、求同存异，为不同文化传统、政治制度、发展阶段国家间和平共处和合作共赢作出表率。	
We need to enhance mutual understanding to reinforce the bond of mutual trust. To enhance mutual trust, we must live in ­harmony without seeking uniformity and pursue common ground while reserving ­differences, thus setting a good example of peaceful coexistence and win-win co-operation between countries of different cultural traditions, political systems and stages of development.
我们要深化务实合作，巩固利益纽带。中澳要充分发挥经济互补优势，开拓双方在能源资源等传统领域合作新局面，打造金融、基础设施、农牧业等新的合作增长点，以更好服务于两国各自发展和民生改善。	
We need to deepen practical co-operation to reinforce the bond of common interests. While striving to break new grounds in our traditional areas of co-operation like energy and resources, we should work to create new stimulus of growth in bilateral ­co-operation in finance, infrastructure development, agriculture and animal husbandry by bringing into full play our ­economic complementarity. This way, we can better facilitate our respective effort to grow ­economy and improve people's livelihood.
我们要鼓励民间交流，巩固人文纽带。要不断扩大两国教育、文化、旅游、青年等领域交流合作，讲好中国故事和澳大利亚故事，让中澳友好扎根两国人民心间。	
We need to encourage people-to-people exchanges to reinforce the cultural bond between our people. It is important to expand exchanges and co-operation in education, culture, ­tourism, between the youth, and tell the China story and Australia story well so that the China-Australia ­friendship will take root deep in the hearts of our people.
我们要加强战略沟通，巩固多边合作纽带。中方愿同澳方一道，加强在国际和地区机制中的沟通和协调，携手应对各种传统和非传统安全问题，共同维护和促进亚太地区乃至世界的和平与繁荣。	
We need to step up strategic communication to reinforce the bond of multilateral ­co-operation. The Chinese side stands ready to work with the Australian side to strengthen communication and co-ordination in international and regional ­mechanisms, and deal with traditional and non-traditional security issues of all kinds to jointly safeguard and promote peace and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific and beyond.
我这次访问澳大利亚还有一个重要日程就是出席在布里斯班举行的二十国集团领导人第九次峰会。	
An important agenda item for my visit to Australia is to attend the ninth G20 Summit to be held in Brisbane.
这个11月，中国和澳大利亚都是国际社会关注的焦点。在亚太经合组织第二十二次领导人非正式会议期间，中国同澳大利亚及其他成员经济体一道，围绕“共建面向未来的亚太伙伴关系”主题，在推动区域经济一体化，促进经济创新发展、改革、增长，加强全方位基础设施和互联互通建设等方面取得积极成果。	
Like Australia, China has also been in the international spotlight this November, as we have hosted the 22nd APEC Economic ­Leaders' Meeting. China will work in concert with Australia and other APEC member economies to discuss ways to "shape the future through Asia-Pacific partnership", the theme of the meeting, and achieve ­positive outcomes in pushing forward regional economic integration, promoting innovative development, economic reform and growth, and strengthening infrastructure and connectivity building in all aspects.
我期待着继续延续中澳合作良好势头，同阿博特总理和其他二十国集团成员国领导人一道，制定二十国集团全面增长战略，通过经济改革、基础设施投资、建设开放型世界经济等举措，挖掘新的增长点，推动世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长。	
I look forward to building on the good momentum of co-operation between China and Australia, and working with Prime ­Minister Tony Abbott and leaders of other G20 member countries to formulate a ­comprehensive G20 growth strategy, develop new areas of growth through ­economic reform, investment in infrastructure and building an open world economy, to promote strong, sustainable and balanced growth of the world economy.
11月的南半球阳光遍洒，澳大利亚大陆处处焕发勃勃生机。中澳友好合作已经踏上了新的征程。只要我们携手并肩、加倍努力，中澳关系未来必将更加精彩可期！	
Bathing in the pervasive sunshine in the Southern Hemisphere of November, the Australian continent is brimming with ­vigour and vitality. China-Australia friendship and co-operation has embarked on a new journey. So long as we work hand-in-hand and redouble our efforts, our relations will surely embrace an even brighter future.
130. 习近平在荷兰《新鹿特丹商业报》发表署名文章《打开欧洲之门 携手共创繁荣》
打开欧洲之门 携手共创繁荣
——在荷兰《新鹿特丹商业报》的署名文章
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Work Together for Common Prosperity Through the Gateway to Europe
Article by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
Published in Dutch Newspaper NRC Handelsblad
3月22日，我飞赴荷兰，展开我担任中华人民共和国主席以来对欧洲的首次正式访问。这次访问涵盖欧洲大小国家、欧盟总部、联合国专门机构。	
On 22 March, I arrived in the Netherlands to begin my first visit to Europe as President of the People's Republic of China. The visit will take me to four European countries as well as the headquarters of the European Union and a specialized agency of the United Nations.
欧洲是多极化世界的重要一极，是中国的全面战略伙伴。中方始终从战略高度看待中欧关系，把欧洲作为中国外交的主要方向。我这次欧洲之行，就是要同欧洲伙伴增进互信、深化合作、承前启后、继往开来，全面提高中欧关系水平。荷兰是欧洲重要门户，是我这次访问的第一站。我在这里代表中国人民，向全体欧洲人民，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿。	
Europe is an important pole in a multi-polar world and China's comprehensive strategic partner. China has all along viewed its relationship with Europe from a strategic perspective and takes Europe as a priority in its diplomacy. My visit to Europe is intended to increase mutual trust, deepen cooperation, build on past achievements and pursue new progress with our European partners and comprehensively raise the level of China-Europe relations. The Netherlands is a main gateway to Europe and the first stop of my European trip. Here, I wish to extend sincere greetings and best wishes to all people in Europe on behalf of the people of China.
——我这次访欧是为和平而来。中国有句古话：“天时不如地利，地利不如人和。”当前世界需要发展，发展需要和平。中国人民同各国人民一样，既要争取和平的国际环境发展自己，又要通过自身的发展维护和促进世界和平。	
- I am traveling to Europe to promote peace. As an old Chinese adage goes, "Opportune time is not as helpful as a favorable geographical position, whereas a favorable geographical position is not as important as a harmonious relationship." The world needs development and development requires peace. The Chinese people, like people of other countries in the world, need a peaceful international environment to develop their country. They also stand ready to safeguard and promote world peace and development through China's own development.
荷兰海牙核安全峰会肩负规划核安全进程未来蓝图的历史使命。保障核材料和核设施安全，有效应对核恐怖主义威胁，不仅事关各国国家安全和社会稳定，也事关人类可持续发展。我期待在这次峰会上同各国及有关国际组织领导人一道，分享经验和心得，深入探讨推动国际核安全，对未来核安全进程作出合理规划，为人类和平作出积极贡献。	
The Hague Nuclear Security Summit has a historic mission to draw a blueprint for the future of the nuclear security process. The safety and security of nuclear materials and facilities as well as effective response to threat of nuclear terrorism matter not only to the security and stability of all countries but also to sustainable development of mankind. I look forward to sharing experience and ideas with leaders of other countries and relevant international organizations, discussing with them ways to advance international nuclear security and formulating a sound future plan for the nuclear security process in a bid to contribute to world peace.
——我这次访欧是为推动合作而来。中欧经贸关系是世界上规模最大、最具活力的经贸关系之一。欧盟是中国第一大贸易伙伴，中国是欧盟第二大贸易伙伴，双方互为最重要的两大市场，合作潜力巨大，合作前景广阔。作为最大的发展中国家和最大的发达国家联合体，中欧合作远远超出双边范畴，具有全球性意义。双方加强合作，不仅有利于各自发展，也有利于世界和平、稳定、繁荣。	
- I am traveling to Europe to promote cooperation. China and Europe enjoy one of the largest and most dynamic economic and trade relationships in the world. The EU is China's top trading partner and China the EU' second largest. They are the most important markets for each other with enormous potential and broad prospects for cooperation. Moreover, cooperation between China as the world's largest developing country and the EU as the biggest grouping of developed countries in the world, extends far beyond the bilateral scope and takes on global significance. Stronger China-EU cooperation will contribute not only to their respective development, but also to world peace, stability and prosperity.
访问期间，我将同有关国家和欧盟机构领导人就新形势下深化中欧全面战略伙伴关系，扩大务实合作深入交换意见，找准彼此发展战略规划契合点，推动中欧合作深入发展，共同促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长。	
During the visit, I will have in-depth exchange of views with leaders of relevant countries and EU institutions on deepening China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership and expanding practical cooperation under new circumstances. I hope the two sides will identify areas where our development strategies could dovetail so as to deepen China-EU cooperation and jointly promote strong, sustainable and balanced growth of the world economy.
——我这次访欧是为交流互鉴而来。中国正在全面深化改革，推动经济社会持续健康发展，推动人民生活水平和质量不断得到改善。欧盟在应对主权债务问题和推进欧洲一体化过程中也积累了大量经验。我们愿意同欧方相互交流学习，互通有无，推动各自改革发展取得成功。我们也希望同欧方密切沟通和协调，共同致力于基于规则的，更加透明、公正、合理、有效的国际治理体系建设。	
- I am traveling to Europe to promote experience sharing. China is comprehensively deepening reform, pursuing sustained and sound economic and social development and improving the standards and quality of people's lives. The EU has gained useful experience in tackling the sovereign debt issue and advancing European integration. China hopes to share experience with Europe so that both would benefit and succeed in their reform and development endeavors. We also hope to maintain close communication and coordination with Europe and work together for a rule-based and more transparent, fair, reasonable and effective international governance system.
——我这次访欧是为共促文明进步而来。人文交流是促进和平发展的积极要素，也是经济发展的重要推动力。中欧作为东西方两大文明的代表，为人类进步作出了不可磨灭的贡献。中欧人口总量和经济总量分别占世界四分之一和三分之一，扩大人文交往，对增进相互了解、促进社会繁荣至关重要。我将同欧洲领导人就深化中欧人文合作、便利双方人员往来等交换意见，努力增进双方民间友好，促进东西方两大文明互通互鉴，推动人类文明进步和繁荣。	
- I am traveling to Europe to promote mutual-learning between civilizations. People-to-people exchange is a positive factor for peace and development and an important driving force behind economic growth. China and Europe, representing the Eastern and Western civilizations, have both made indelible contribution to human progress. Our combined population and economy respectively account for one fourth and one third of the world's total. Expanded people-to-people exchange is critical to increasing mutual understanding and social prosperity. I will exchange views with European leaders on deepening China-Europe cultural cooperation and facilitating people-to-people exchanges, so as to strengthen friendship among the people, promote mutual learning between the Eastern and Western civilizations, and facilitate thriving progress of human civilization.
荷兰是中国在欧洲重要的合作伙伴。中荷有直达铁路、货轮、商业航班，形成了全方位互联互通的独特优势。中荷合作领域广、规模大、内生动力强，以务实高效著称，是中欧合作的缩影和典范。荷兰连续11年保持中国在欧盟第二大贸易伙伴地位，是欧盟第三大对华直接投资来源国，中国是荷兰在欧盟外第一大贸易伙伴和第二大投资来源国。双方在农业、水利、石化、物流等领域合作走在中欧合作前列。荷兰是对华合作最开放的欧洲国家之一，双方都支持贸易自由化，都致力于建设开放透明、公平有序的市场和竞争环境。
The Netherlands is China's important partner in Europe. The direct links of railway, cargo liners and commercial flights between China and the Netherlands have given us a distinct advantage in all-dimensional connectivity. Our cooperation, which is wide in area, large in scale and driven by strong internal forces and is well known for its high efficiency and practical results, serves as a fine example in China-Europe cooperation. The Netherlands has been China's second largest trading partner in the EU for 11 consecutive years and third largest source of direct investment for China in the EU, while China is the biggest trading partner and second largest source of investment of the Netherlands outside the EU. Our cooperation in agriculture, water conservancy, petrochemical, logistics and other fields sets the pace for cooperation between China and Europe. The Netherlands is among those European countries that are most open to cooperation with China. Both sides support trade liberalization and both are committed to an open and transparent environment for fair and orderly market competition.
我这次访问是中国国家元首首次访问荷兰，标志着两国关系进入新的发展阶段。访问期间，我同荷兰领导人共商合作大计，并广泛接触各界人士，共同规划两国关系未来发展，丰富双边务实合作内涵，推动两国关系迈上新的更高水平，并一致决定建立开放务实的全面合作伙伴关系。双方发表了联合声明，签署了能源、农业、金融、投资、文化等领域多个合作文件。	
My visit to the Netherlands is the first by a Chinese head of state. During the visit, I have discussed with Dutch leaders on how to promote cooperation and had extensive contact with people from various sectors. Together, we have charted the future course of our relations, enriched practical cooperation and elevated the bilateral relationship to a new and higher level. We have decided to build an open and pragmatic partnership for comprehensive cooperation. The two sides have issued a Joint Statement and signed a host of documents on cooperation in energy, agriculture, financial, investment, cultural and other fields.
冬去春来，万象更新，时间的脚步永不停歇。北京和阿姆斯特丹相距近8000公里，但再远的距离也不能阻挡中欧相互走近、扩大合作的步伐，不能阻挡双方民众相互吸引、增进友谊的热情。	
When winter is over and spring arrives, everything takes on a new look, as time never stops moving forward. Beijing and Amsterdam are some 8,000 kilometers away from each other. Yet the distance, however long it might be, could not stop China and the Netherlands from forging closer ties and expanding cooperation. Nor will it ever block the passion for exchanges and friendship cherished by our peoples.
当前，中国正在朝着“两个一百年”奋斗目标前进，欧盟也在加紧推进“欧洲2020”战略。让国家变得更加富强，让社会变得更加公平正义，让人民生活变得更加美好，这是中国人民孜孜不倦追求的理想，也是欧洲人民共同愿望。我们愿意同欧洲各国一道，深化互利共赢合作，共享机遇，共创繁荣。
China is now striving to achieve its two "centenary goals", namely, to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects when the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary in 2021 and turn China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious when the People's Republic of China marks its centennial in 2049. The EU, on its part, is stepping up efforts to implement the Europe 2020 strategy. For the Chinese people, to make the country stronger and more prosperous, the society fairer and more just, and make sure that the people lead a better life is the ideal they have always pursued. I believe the same is true for the European people. We stand ready to work with European countries to deepen win-win cooperation, share opportunities and create greater prosperity.
我对欧洲之行充满期待。我坚信，2014年必将开启一个充满生机活力的中欧关系新时期。
I have great expectations for my up-coming visit to Europe. I am confident that 2014 will surely usher the China-Europe relations into a new period of great vigor and dynamism.
98. 习近平在南非媒体发表署名文章《让友谊、合作的彩虹更加绚丽夺目》
让友谊、合作的彩虹更加绚丽夺目
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
A Rainbow of Friendship
H.E. Xi Jinping Chinese President
“彩虹之国”南非，是镶嵌在非洲大陆最南端一颗耀眼的明珠。这是一片神奇的土地，风光秀美，资源富饶，人民勤劳，文化多元。在这片土地上，诞生了曼德拉，演绎了化干戈为玉帛的种族和解传奇。这里历经磨难又充满荣耀的民族解放斗争历史，赋予南非独特、深厚的魅力，吸引着世界的目光。	
South Africa, the Rainbow Nation, is a shining pearl on the southern tip of the African continent.This amazing land with beautiful landscape, rich resources, hard-working people and diverse culture was home to Nelson Mandela and the legend of racial reconciliation that turned bitter confrontation into harmonious coexistence.Its glorious history of struggling for national liberation through trials and tribulations has given this country a unique and profound appeal that has captured the attention of the world.
怀着对亲密兄弟的友好感情，我将再次踏上这片美丽的土地，对南非进行国事访问，并同祖马总统一道主持中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会。	
Cherishing friendly sentiments for a dear brother, I will once again set foot on the beautiful land of South Africa.I will be here on a state visit and co-chair with President Jacob Zuma the Johannesburg Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Co-operation (Focac).
“志合者，不以山海为远。”中国和南非虽然远隔千山万水，但两国人民友谊历久弥坚。早在南非人民反种族隔离斗争时期，中国人民就坚定支持南非人民争取平等、自由、解放的正义事业，同南非人民同呼吸、共命运、心连心，结下了深厚情谊。	
As a Chinese saying goes: “Nothing, not even mountains or oceans, can separate people with shared goals and vision.” Though geographically far apart from each other, the people of China and South Africa have enjoyed a friendship that becomes increasingly solid with the passage of time. Back in the South African people’s fight against apartheid, the Chinese people firmly supported the just pursuit of equality, freedom and liberation by the South Africans and stood in solidarity with them. This was the beginning of a deep friendship.
1998年中国同新南非正式建交，开启了中南关系新纪元。17年来，中南关系全面发展，实现了从伙伴关系到战略伙伴关系、再到全面战略伙伴关系的三级跳，完成了双边关系大踏步发展的历史性跨越，成为各自对外关系中最具活力、最重要的双边关系之一。	
In 1998, China and the new South Africa established diplomatic ties, ushering in a new era of China-South Africa relations.Over the 17 years since then, China-South Africa relations have developed across the board.
Upgraded from a partnership to a strategic partnership and then to a comprehensive strategic partnership, our relations have made a historic leap forward and become one of the most dynamic and important bilateral ties in our respective foreign relations.
17年来，中南友好合作已经从一艘小船成长为巨轮，沿着互利共赢、共同发展的方向不断乘风破浪前行。当前，中南关系进入历史最好时期，从程度空前的政治互信、日益密切的国际协作，到成果丰硕的务实合作、丰富多彩的人文交流，无不体现着中南关系的战略高度。	
Over the past 17 years, our friendship and co-operation has grown from a small boat to a gigantic vessel, riding the wind and waves and forging ahead towards greater mutual benefit and common development. The China-South Africa relationship is at its best in history.
The strategic importance of this relationship is manifested in the unprecedented level of political mutual trust, increasingly close international co-ordination, fruitful pragmatic co-operation and wide-ranging cultural and people-to-people exchanges.
2013年，我就任中国国家主席后首次出访就来到南非。近3年来，我和祖马总统实现互访，在多边场合多次举行会晤，就新形势下中南关系发展达成一系列重要共识，将双边关系确定为各自对外政策战略支点和优先方向，共同制定了《中南5－10年合作战略规划》，为中南全面战略伙伴关系发展注入了强劲动力。	
In 2013, I came to South Africa on my first foreign trip as president of China. In the past three years, President Zuma and I exchanged visits and held meetings on various multilateral occasions. We have reached a series of important consensus on the development of China-South Africa relations under the new circumstances, identified our bilateral ties as the strategic fulcrum and priority in our respective foreign policies and jointly formulated the China-South Africa Five-to-Ten-Year Strategic Programme for Co-operation, thus injecting strong impetus into the China-South Africa comprehensive strategic partnership.
中南关系已经超越双边范畴，越来越具有战略意义和全球影响。中南都是发展中大国和新兴市场国家，秉持相同或相近的发展观、安全观、国际秩序观，在重大国际事务和热点问题上有着广泛共识，双方在联合国、二十国集团、金砖国家、气候变化“基础四国”等国际组织和多边机制中密切协调和配合，开展了卓有成效的合作。	
China-South Africa relations have gone beyond the bilateral scope and gained growing strategic significance and global impact.China and South Africa, as two major developing countries and emerging market economies, hold identical or similar views on development, security and international order and share broad consensus on major international affairs and hotspot issues. Our two countries have closely co-ordinated and co-operated with each other in such international organisations and multilateral mechanisms as the UN, G20, Brics and Basic countries.
两国经贸合作利益交融不断加深。2014年，中南双边贸易额603亿美元，较建交时增长了近40倍，中国已经连续6年成为南非最大贸易伙伴。中国对南非投资从无到有，迄今已经达到130亿美元，南非成为中国在非洲投资最多的国家。中国企业在南非投资建设的家电产业园、汽车、机车组装厂、水泥厂等项目为当地创造了上万个就业机会，海信电视、冰箱作为主要家电品牌走入南非千家万户，南非企业在华合资生产的雪花啤酒也成为深受中国人民喜爱的饮品。	
Our economic co-operation and trade have led to greater convergence of interests. In 2014, two-way trade reached $60.3 billion, an almost 40-fold increase from the figure at the start of diplomatic engagement. China has for six years in a row been South Africa’s largest trading partner. Chinese investment in South Africa has risen from zero to $13bn, making South Africa the top destination of Chinese investment in Africa. Projects invested and undertaken by Chinese companies such as industrial parks of home appliances, assembly plants of vehicles and locomotives and cement factories have created over 10 000 jobs for the local communities. Hisense television sets and refrigerators are a household name in South Africa and Snow Beer produced in China by a Chinese-South African joint venture is very popular among Chinese consumers.
两国人民架起了友谊的彩虹之桥。南非是同中国建立友好省市、设有孔子学院和课堂、接纳中国留学生最多的非洲国家。去年和今年，中南两国分别在对方国家成功举办国家年活动，向对方国家人民展示了精彩的艺术文化和发展成就，引起强烈反响，这在中国同非洲国家中属于首次，开创了中非人文交流的新篇章。	
Our two peoples have built a rainbow bridge of friendship. South Africa has more sister provinces/cities with China and hosts more Confucius institutes and classrooms as well as Chinese students than any other African country. We held the Year of South Africa and the Year of China in each other’s countries last year and this year respectively, showcasing to the people our development achievements as well as splendid art and culture. These events, the first of their kind between China and African countries, have been well received and opened a new chapter in China-Africa cultural and people-to-people exchanges.
在中国同所有其他国家友好关系中，17年并不长。但在中南两国高层亲自推动和双方精诚努力下，中南关系历经17年发展，已经成为中国同非洲乃至同发展中大国团结合作的典范。	
Seen in the context of China’s friendship with all other countries, 17 years may not seem long. But thanks to the personal commitment of our top leaders and the tremendous efforts of our two sides, China-South Africa relations, after 17 years of growth, have become a model of solidarity and co-operation between China and Africa and between China and other major developing countries.
“欲穷千里目，更上一层楼。”中南关系已经站在新的历史起点上，双方加强合作的意愿强烈。我们愿同南方一道，抓住机遇，乘势而上，推动中南全面战略伙伴关系不断迈上新台阶，更好造福两国人民。	
An ancient Chinese poem reads: “To see a thousand miles, one should ascend another storey.” China-South Africa relations now stand at a new historic starting point, with both sides keen to strengthen co-operation. We stand ready to work together with South Africa and seize the opportunities and momentum to take our comprehensive strategic partnership to new heights to better serve our peoples.
——中南要做面向未来、高度互信的战略伙伴。双方要始终从战略高度和长远角度看待和发展两国关系，不断巩固和增进两国政治互信，为中南全面务实合作的长期健康发展奠定坚实政治基础。	
China and South Africa should be forward-looking strategic partners with strong mutual trust. The two sides should always approach and advance the bilateral relationship from a strategic and long-term perspective, continuously cement and enhance political mutual trust, and lay a solid political foundation for sustained and sound growth of our practical co-operation in all fields.
——中南要做平等互利、合作共赢的发展伙伴。我们要发挥政治互信和经济互补两大优势，将中南友好更多转化为两国务实合作的强大动力，推动海洋经济、产能、能源、基础设施建设、人力资源开发、金融等重点领域合作结出更多硕果，为两国人民带来更多实实在在的利益。	
China and South Africa should be development partners pursuing equality, mutual benefit and win-win co-operation. We should leverage our strengths in political mutual trust and economic complementarity, translate our friendship into a strong boost for practical co-operation, and promote more fruitful co-operation in such key areas as marine economy, production capacity, energy, infrastructure, human resources and finance to deliver more tangible benefits to our peoples.
——中南要做相知相亲、交流互鉴的友好伙伴。友谊从认识和理解开始。中方愿同南方加强旅游、文化、教育、青年、妇女、智库、媒体等领域交流合作，期待两国人民在更多的往来中不断拉近彼此距离，也欢迎更多南非朋友到中国走一走、看一看。	
China and South Africa should be friendly partners who understand and learn from each other.Friendship begins with knowing and understanding each other. China is ready for closer exchanges and co-operation with South Africa in tourism, culture and education and between our youths, women, think-tanks and media. We hope more interactions between our peoples will bring them closer to each other. We look forward to having more South African friends to visit China.
——中南要做相互支持、密切协作的全球伙伴。中方支持南方在国际和地区事务中发挥更大作用，愿加强双方在重要国际机制中以及重大国际问题上的协调和合作，共同做广大发展中国家利益的坚定维护者和世界和平、稳定、繁荣的积极促进者。	
China and South Africa should be global partners who support and co-ordinate closely with each other. China supports South Africa in playing a bigger role in international and regional affairs, and stands ready to enhance co-ordination and co-operation with South Africa in important international mechanisms and major international issues. We will remain firm defenders of developing countries’ interests and active advocates for world peace, stability and prosperity.
今年是中南关系、也是中非关系发展进程中具有特殊意义的年份。我这次访问南非的另一项重要日程，是同祖马总统一道主持中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会。今年恰逢中非合作论坛成立15周年。15年来，中非合作论坛已经成为中非集体对话的重要平台和促进务实合作的有效机制，有力促进了中非共同发展，给中非人民带来了实实在在的利益。	
This year bears special significance for the development of China’s relations with not only South Africa but also Africa as a whole. Another important agenda during my visit to South Africa this time is to co-chair the Focac Johannesburg Summit with President Jacob Zuma. This year marks the 15th anniversary of Focac. Over the years, this forum has become a crucial platform for collective dialogue between China and Africa and an effective mechanism for closer practical co-operation. It has greatly boosted the common development of China and Africa and brought real benefits to the Chinese and African people alike.
中国是最大的发展中国家，非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆，中国和非洲历来是命运共同体。当前，非洲各国普遍期待加快工业化和农业现代化进程，致力于实现经济独立和自主可持续发展，中国正在全面深化改革，推进经济结构调整，具备了更多同非洲国家在优势互补基础上实现互利共赢发展的条件。中非发展战略高度契合，中非合作发展迎来了前所未有的历史性机遇。	
China is the largest developing country and Africa is home to the biggest number of developing countries. China and Africa have always shared a common future. Today African countries share a common aspiration for faster progress in industrialisation and agricultural modernisation as well as economic independence and sustainable development. At the same time, China is deepening reform in all respects and advancing economic restructuring, making it better positioned to conduct win-win co-operation with African countries through mutual complementarity. The considerable commonalities between our development strategies represent an unprecedented historical opportunity for expanding our co-operation.
中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会即将拉开帷幕，这是论坛成立15年来举行的第二次峰会，也是首次在非洲大陆举行的中非峰会。中非领导人汇聚一堂，共叙友谊、共谋合作，将全面规划中非未来3年各领域友好务实合作，推动中非合作全面发展，将中非关系提升到新的高度。这次论坛峰会是中非关系发展的里程碑，将向世界发出中非携手并进、合作共赢、共同发展的强烈信号，让中非和世界人民看到发展的新前景。	
The curtain will soon rise for the Focac Summit in Joburg. This is the second summit in the 15 years since the forum’s inception, and the first to be held in Africa. Chinese and African leaders will gather here to renew friendship and explore co-operation, charting the course for China-Africa friendly and practical co-operation in various fields in the next three years, promoting the all-round growth of our co-operation, and taking China-Africa relations to a new high. The summit will be a milestone in the development of China-Africa relations and send a strong message to the world that China and Africa are working hand in hand for win-win co-operation and common development. It will outline a new vision of development to the people in China and Africa and around the world.
当前，国际形势继续发生深刻复杂变化，发展中国家整体力量不断上升，世界将关注的目光越来越投向非洲这个生机勃勃的大陆。我们相信，即将举行的中非峰会将促进南南合作，带动南北对话，推动国际治理体系向更加公正合理方向发展。我们期待这一历史性盛会取得圆满成功，开启中非合作共赢、共同发展的新时代。	
As the world continues to undergo profound and complex changes and as developing countries acquire growing collective strength, more eyes will be on this vibrant continent of Africa. We are convinced that the upcoming summit will promote South-South co-operation, encourage North-South dialogue, and help move the international governance system towards greater equity and fairness. We look forward to a complete success of this historic event and a new era of win-win co-operation and common development for China and Africa.
我期待并坚信，只要我们携手努力，中南、中非关系必将百尺竿头、更进一步，跨越在亚非大陆之间的中南、中非友谊和合作的彩虹，必将更加绚丽夺目！	
I hope and believe that with our concerted efforts, China-South Africa and China-Africa relations will make still greater progress and the rainbow of China-South Africa and China-Africa friendship and co-operation connecting the two continents of Asia and Africa will display even more splendour.
118. 习近平在巴基斯坦媒体发表署名文章《中巴人民友谊万岁》
中巴人民友谊万岁
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Pak-China Dosti Zindabad
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
在巴基斯坦，有这样一句乌尔都语诗歌：“朋友的美好形象，就在我心的明镜之中，稍一低头，就能看见。”在我心目中，巴基斯坦就是这样一位好朋友。我年轻时就经常听说关于巴基斯坦和中巴友好的动人故事，如巴基斯坦人民用勤劳的双手建设着自己美丽的家园，巴基斯坦为中国提供同世界联系的空中走廊，支持中国恢复联合国合法席位，等等。这些故事给我留下深刻印象。我期待着即将对巴基斯坦进行国事访问。这是我首次访问巴基斯坦，但我感觉就像到自己兄弟家中探访一样。
"My friend's lovely image dwells in the mirror of my heart; I tilt my head slightly, and here it comes into my sight." Just as this line from an Urdu poem describes, Pakistan is such a good friend in my heart. When I was young, I heard many touching stories about Pakistan and the friendship between our two countries. To name just a few, I learned that the Pakistani people were working hard to build their beautiful country, and that Pakistan opened an air corridor for China to reach out to the world and supported China in restoring its lawful seat in the United Nations. The stories have left me with a deep impression. I look forward to my upcoming state visit to Pakistan. This will be my first trip to Pakistan, but I feel as if I am going to visit the home of my own brother.
长期以来，在两国历代领导人和各界人士精心培育下，中巴友谊像一棵茁壮成长的大树，根深叶茂。无论国际和地区形势及两国国内情况如何变化，中巴关系一直健康稳定发展，两国在涉及彼此核心利益问题上始终相互尊重、相互理解、相互支持。在巴基斯坦，人们用“比山高、比海深、比蜜甜”这样诗歌般的语言来赞颂中巴友谊。在中国，人们都把巴基斯坦称作“真诚可靠的朋友”。中巴友谊正日益深深植根于两国人民心中。
Over the years, thanks to the nurturing of generations of leaders and people from all sectors of both countries, China-Pakistan friendship has flourished like a tree growing tall and strong. No matter how the circumstances in our two countries, the region and the world change, our bilateral relations have enjoyed sound and steady growth. We have always respected, understood and supported each other on issues concerning our respective core interests. In Pakistan, our relationship is poetically hailed as a friendship "higher than mountains, deeper than oceans and sweeter than honey." In China, Pakistan is known as a sincere and reliable friend. Obviously, China-Pakistan friendship is deeply felt in the hearts of our two peoples.
长期以来，中巴两国在各领域开展了全方位互利合作，结出了累累硕果，给两国人民带来实实在在的利益。当前，两国正在稳步推进中巴经济走廊建设，致力于打造中巴命运共同体。中巴合作的出发点和立足点是深化两国利益融合，携手共谋发展，为两国人民带来更多福祉，绘制更加美好的发展蓝图。	
Over a long period of time, China and Pakistan have conducted all-round, mutually beneficial and fruitful cooperation in various fields, bringing tangible benefits to the people of both countries. At present, the two sides are working together to steadily advance the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. Committed to building a China-Pakistan community of common destiny, we cooperate to expand our converging interests and strive for common development. Our aim is to deliver even more benefits to our peoples and realize brighter development prospects.
巴基斯坦政府和人民致力于发展经济、改善民生，同时坚决打击恐怖主义和极端主义，维护国家安全和社会稳定，取得了显著成效。作为好朋友、好兄弟，中方为巴方取得的每一点进步、每一项成就感到由衷高兴。我相信，只要巴基斯坦人民齐心协力、团结奋进，就一定能够找到符合自身国情的发展道路，在国家建设事业中取得更大成就，早日实现成为“亚洲之虎”的梦想。	
The government and people of Pakistan are pursuing economic development and the improvement of people's livelihood. At the same time, Pakistan is resolutely fighting terrorism and extremism. As a result, good progress has been made in national security and social stability. As Pakistan's good friend and brother, China is truly happy for every progress and achievement of Pakistan. I believe that as long as the Pakistani people work together in unity, Pakistan will surely embark on a development path suited to its national conditions, achieve even greater success in national development and realize its dream of becoming an "Asian tiger" at an early date.
中国人民正在努力实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。中国梦是和平、发展、合作、共赢的梦，我们追求中国人民的福祉，也追求各国人民共同的福祉。中国愿同包括巴基斯坦在内的南亚各国和睦相处，愿为南亚发展添砖加瓦。中国提出丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路倡议，就是要通过加强沿线国家互联互通，实现共同发展。	
The Chinese people are working toward the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. It is a dream about peace, development and win-win cooperation. What we pursue is not just the interests of the Chinese people, but also the common interests of the world people. China wishes to live in harmony with Pakistan and other countries in South Asia and contribute its share to the development of this region. The aim of China's initiative of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is to promote common development by enhancing connectivity among countries along these routes. We hope that this initiative will enable us to work together with South Asian countries to fulfill our common dream of rapid development.
我这次对巴基斯坦进行国事访问，是我今年首次出访的第一站。访问期间，我将会见侯赛因总统、谢里夫总理等巴基斯坦领导人，广泛接触各界人士，同他们就两国关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见。我期待着通过这次访问，同巴基斯坦领导人一道谋划两国合作总体框架，推动中巴经济走廊建设和其他各领域务实合作取得实质性进展，使中巴关系在更高水平上向前发展。	
Pakistan is the first stop of my first overseas visit this year. During my visit, I will meet with President Mamnoon Hussain, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and other Pakistani leaders as well as people from various sectors for in-depth exchange of views on bilateral relations and issues of shared interest. I look forward to working with Pakistani leaders during the visit to explore the general framework for bilateral cooperation, make substantive progress in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and practical cooperation in other fields and push for the furtherance of bilateral ties at a higher level.
——我们要把两国发展战略更紧密结合起来，共圆人民梦想。中巴两国肩负着发展经济和改善民生的历史重任。我们要加强战略协调，深化务实合作，携手共谋发展，将中巴命运共同体打造成为中国同周边国家构建命运共同体的典范。	
-- China and Pakistan need to align development strategies more closely to realize the dreams of our peoples. Both our countries face the important task of economic development and improvement of people's livelihood. We need to enhance strategic coordination, deepen practical cooperation and work together for common development. We will build the China-Pakistan community of common destiny and set a fine example for such efforts by China and its neighbouring countries.
——我们要把两国经贸战略更紧密对接起来，深化经济融合。中巴经济走廊位于丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路交汇处，是“一带一路”倡议的重大项目。双方要以中巴经济走廊建设为中心，瓜达尔港、能源、基础设施建设、产业合作为四大重点，形成“1+4”合作布局，带动巴基斯坦各地区发展，让巴基斯坦广大民众得到实惠。	
-- China and Pakistan need to align economic and trade strategies more closely to deepen economic interdependence. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is located in where the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road meet. It is, therefore, a major project of the "Belt and Road" initiative. We need to form a "1+4" cooperation structure with the Economic Corridor at the centre and the Gwadar Port, energy, infrastructure and industrial cooperation being the four key areas to drive development across Pakistan and deliver tangible benefits to its people.
——我们要把两国安全关切更紧密结合起来，加强安全合作。中巴两国安全利益息息相关。安全合作和经济合作相辅相成，相互促进，两个轮子要一起转。我们要深化防务领域合作，加强在地区热点问题上的协调和配合。	
-- China and Pakistan need to align security concerns more closely to strengthen security cooperation. The security interests of China and Pakistan are closely related. Our cooperation in the security and economic fields reinforce each other, and they must be advanced simultaneously. We need to deepen defence cooperation and enhance coordination and collaboration on regional hotspot issues.
——我们要把两国人文交流更紧密联通起来，推动文明对话。两国应该把良好政治关系转化为人文交流的动力，打造不同文明交流互鉴、友好合作的样板。今年是中巴友好交流年，双方要精心组织、密切配合，办好系列庆祝活动。双方要扩大人员往来、语言培训、青年交流、地方友城、传媒和智库合作，让中巴友好扎根基层，让两国人民的心灵更加贴近。	
-- China and Pakistan need to intensify people-to-people and cultural exchanges to promote inter-civilization dialogue. On the basis of our excellent political ties, we should build a momentum of people-to-people exchanges and set a good example of mutual learning and friendly cooperation between different civilizations. This year is the China-Pakistan Year of Friendly Exchanges. The two sides should work closely together to ensure the success of the celebration activities. We need to increase mutual visits, language training, youth exchange and cooperation between sister cities, media and think-tanks so that China-Pakistan friendship will have strong popular support, and the hearts of our peoples will be brought even closer.
——我们要把两国外交战略更紧密协调起来，建设和谐周边。中巴两国在重大国际和地区问题上拥有相同或相似立场，要保持密切沟通和协调，维护两国共同利益，共同营造和平稳定的周边环境。	
-- China and Pakistan need to coordinate diplomatic strategies more closely to build a harmonious neighbourhood. Our two countries have common or similar positions on major international and regional issues. It is important that we maintain close communication and coordination to protect our common interests and foster a peaceful and stable neighbouring environment.
让我们携手并肩，共同努力，开创中巴关系更加美好的未来！
Let us stand shoulder to shoulder and work hand-in-hand to open up an even brighter future of China-Pakistan relations.
中巴人民友谊万岁！
China-Pak dosti zindabad! (Long live China-Pakistan friendship!)
99. 习近平在津巴布韦媒体发表署名文章《让中津友谊绽放出更加绚丽的芳华》
让中津友谊绽放出更加绚丽的芳华
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Let the Sino-Zimbabwe Flower Bloom
H.E. Xi Jinping Chinese President
应罗伯特·加布里埃尔·穆加贝总统邀请，我将于12月1日至2日对津巴布韦进行国事访问。这是我首次访问津巴布韦，我对此行充满期待。	
At the invitation of President Robert Gabriel Mugabe, I will pay a State visit to Zimbabwe on December 1-2. I am very much looking forward to this first visit to Zimbabwe.
尽管尚未踏上津巴布韦的土地，但我对这个美丽国家和这里的人民并不陌生。这里有悠久的历史、灿烂的文明、秀丽的风景、丰饶的物产，更有勤劳智慧、勇敢坚强的人民。	
Though I have not been to Zimbabwe, I am no stranger to this beautiful country and its people. Zimbabwe boasts a time-honoured history, splendid civilisation, picturesque scenery and rich resources. And more importantly, the Zimbabwean people are hardworking, creative, courageous and strong-willed.
津巴布韦人民一贯珍视国家独立、捍卫民族尊严，致力于非洲大陆的联合自强。正如大津巴布韦遗址中的石雕“津巴布韦鸟”，历经岁月和风雨打磨始终不改本色。逆风，恰恰是激励鸟儿展翅翱翔、越飞越高的动力。	
The Zimbabwean people have all along been committed to upholding national independence and dignity and building a stronger African continent through unity. They have persevered in their endeavour despite the test of time and setbacks, just as the stone-carved Zimbabwe Bird at the ruins of Great Zimbabwe. In fact, it is headwind that makes birds fly even higher.
中国和津巴布韦虽然远隔万里，但联结两国人民的传统友谊深厚而牢固。在津巴布韦民族解放斗争时期，两国人民并肩战斗，结下了难忘的战友情。我听说，许多当年在中国国内和坦桑尼亚纳钦圭阿营地接受中方培训的津巴布韦自由战士，至今仍会哼唱《三大纪律、八项注意》等歌曲，这令我非常感动。	
China and Zimbabwe, in spite of the vast distance between them, have maintained a traditional friendship that is deep and firm. During the national liberation struggle in Zimbabwe, the Chinese people steadfastly stood behind the Zimbabwean people as comrades-in-arms. I was touched to learn that many Zimbabwean freedom fighters who received training from the Chinese side both in China and at Nachingwea camp in Tanzania can still sing songs such as the "Three Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention".
1980年4月18日津巴布韦独立当天，中津两国就建立了外交关系。35年来，中国人民和津巴布韦人民风雨同舟，友谊历久弥坚，合作硕果累累。去年8月，穆加贝总统成功对中国进行国事访问。中津双方一致同意将两国打造成为平等相待、相互支持、互利共赢、共同发展的好伙伴、好朋友、好兄弟。这一共识对引领中津关系发展具有重要意义。	
It was on the very day that Zimbabwe gained independence, April 18 1980, that our two countries established diplomatic relations. Over the past 35 years, our two peoples have stood with each other in rain or sunshine, and enjoyed strong friendship and fruitful co-operation. In August last year, President Mugabe paid a successful State visit to China. The two sides agreed to be good partners, good friends and good brothers, who treat each other as equals and support each other for win-win co-operation and common development. This agreement has provided a vital guidance for the growth of China-Zimbabwe relations.
目前，中国是津巴布韦第四大贸易伙伴和第一大投资来源国。中方融资并承担的维多利亚瀑布市机场扩建、卡里巴南岸水电站扩建、“移动壹网”电信改造等项目，将为津巴布韦改善基础设施提供重要助力。	
China is now Zimbabwe's fourth largest trading partner and the biggest source of investment. Projects funded and undertaken by China, such as the expansion of the Victoria Falls Airport and Kariba South Hydropower Station and telecoms transformation of TelOne, will give a strong boost to infrastructure development in Zimbabwe.
中津友好也在两国人民心中生根发芽。据我了解，旅居津巴布韦的华侨中间有一个名为“非爱不可”（Love of Africa）的妈妈团体，还有一位连车牌号都被当地孩子熟知的“程爸爸”（Father Cheng）。他们多年如一日给当地孤儿送去关爱和温暖，用实际行动书写着中津友好的“现在时”，也培育着中津友好的“将来时”。	
China-Zimbabwe friendship has also taken root and sprouted in the heart of our two peoples. I know there is a Chinese mothers' group in Zimbabwe called "Love of Africa", and a "Father Cheng" from China who is so close with the local community that even his car plate number is remembered by the kids there. Over the years, they have brought care and warmth to local orphans. Such concrete actions are manifestations of China-Zimbabwe friendship of the current generation and sow the seeds of friendship for future generations.
去年，穆加贝总统访华时代表津巴布韦人民赠送给中国人民1对小狮子，现已正式落户上海野生动物园。它们被命名为“津津”和“菲菲”。在中文中同“津巴布韦”和“非洲”谐音，寓意中津和中非友好。它们已经成为中津友谊的使者，受到中国人民特别是小朋友们的喜爱。	
During his visit to China last year, President Mugabe gave the Chinese people a pair of lion cubs on behalf of the Zimbabwean people. They are now living in the Shanghai Wild Animal Park. They have been named "Jin Jin" and "Fei Fei", which sound the same as the first Chinese characters for Zimbabwe and Africa and symbolise China's friendship with Zimbabwe and Africa. As messengers of China-Zimbabwe friendship, the two cubs are popular with the Chinese people, especially kids.
中津关系不平凡的发展历程表明，中津友谊源于两国真诚友好、重情守义的文化传统，源于两国共同遵循的独立自主、相互尊重等对外关系基本原则，源于两国发展经济、改善民生的共同使命。	
The extraordinary development of China-Zimbabwe relations shows that our friendship is rooted in the cultural tradition of our two countries that values sincerity and friendship, in the basic principles of independence and mutual respect that we both adhere to in conducting foreign relations, and in the common mission of our two countries to grow the economy and improve people's livelihood.
尽管国际形势不断发生深刻复杂变化，但巩固同包括津巴布韦在内的广大非洲国家关系始终是中国外交的基石，永远不会改变。中国将继续秉持真实亲诚的对非政策理念和正确义利观，同津巴布韦以及其他非洲友好国家携手并进，把中非互利共赢、共同发展的道路走得更宽更好。	
Despite the constant profound and complex changes in the international landscape, it remains a cornerstone of China's foreign policy to consolidate China's relations with Zimbabwe and other African nations. This will never change. In conducting China's relations with Africa, we adhere to the principles of sincerity, practical results, affinity and good faith and uphold the values of friendship, justice and shared interests. We will work with Zimbabwe and all other friendly African nations to pave a broader and more solid road of mutual benefit and common development for China and Africa.
当前，中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力奋斗。津巴布韦正在积极推进“可持续经济社会转型计划”，致力于实现经济独立和自主可持续发展。我期待通过这次访问，同穆加贝总统和津巴布韦各界朋友深入交流，增进两国友好，探讨各领域合作新机遇，为两国人民带来更多福祉。	
The Chinese people are striving to achieve our "two centenary goals" and realise the Chinese dream of great national renewal, while Zimbabwe is making vigorous efforts to promote the Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation and achieve economic independence and self-reliant sustainable development.I look forward to having in-depth exchanges of views with President Mugabe and friends from all sectors of Zimbabwe during my visit, with the aim of enhancing friendship between our two countries, exploring new opportunities for co-operation in all areas and delivering more benefits to our two peoples.
——我们要继续在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持，中方坚定支持津方维护国家主权、安全、发展利益，坚定支持津巴布韦根据自身国情选择发展道路。	
-- We need to continue to understand and support each other on issues involving our core interests and major concerns. China firmly supports Zimbabwe's efforts to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests and its choice of the development path that suits its national conditions.
——我们要把两国发展战略紧密对接起来，将经济互补优势转化为更多实实在在的合作成果，加强发展理念交流，推动务实合作提高水平。	
-- We need to synergise our development strategies, translate our economic complementaries into more tangible outcomes of co-operation, carry out more exchanges on guidelines of development and take our practical co-operation to a new level.
——我们要密切人文交流，加强教育、文化、卫生、旅游、青年、智库、媒体等领域合作，巩固两国友好民意和社会基础，让中津友谊代代相传。	
-- We need to strengthen our cultural and people-to-people exchanges, enhance co-operation in such areas as education, culture, health, tourism, youth, think-tanks and media, consolidate the public support and social basis for China-Zimbabwe friendship, and carry this friendship forward to future generations.
——我们要加强国际协作，维护发展中国家正当权益。中方赞赏津巴布韦作为非盟轮值主席国为维护非洲团结和促进非洲发展所作的重要贡献。	
-- We need to enhance our collaboration on the international arena and uphold the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries. China values the important contribution to the solidarity and development of Africa that Zimbabwe has made after assuming the rotating chairmanship of the African Union.
在结束对津巴布韦访问之后，我和穆加贝总统将前往南非出席中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会。这是中非合作论坛成立15年来举行的第二次峰会，也是首次在非洲大陆举行的中非峰会。	
Following my visit to Zimbabwe, President Mugabe and I will attend the Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) in Johannesburg, South Africa. This will be the second Summit in the 15-year history of FOCAC, and the first China-Africa summit on the African continent.
津巴布韦有句谚语叫做“一根柴火煮不熟萨杂”，中国人也常说“众人拾柴火焰高”。我期待着在中非合作论坛峰会上同非洲国家领导人共聚一堂，共叙友谊，共谋合作，将中非团结提升到新的高度，共创中非友好合作美好未来。	
As one Zimbabwe idiom goes, "Chikuni chimwe hachikodzi sadza", Chinese people also believe that, "When everybody adds firewood, the flames will rise high." I look forward to joining African leaders at the FOCAC Summit and working with them to advance our friendship and co-operation, lift China-Africa solidarity to a new high and build a better future for China-Africa friendship and co-operation.
11月的哈拉雷，火红的凤凰花开满枝头，带给人们以热情、希望、力量。我相信，在中津两国人民悉心培育下，中津友谊之花一定会绽放出更加绚丽的色彩！	
Harare in November is decorated by full-blown red flamboyant blossoms. They give us enthusiasm, hope and strength. I am convinced that with the dedicated cultivation of the Chinese and Zimbabwean peoples, the flower of China-Zimbabwe friendship will bloom with even brighter splendour.
82. 习近平在乌兹别克斯坦媒体发表署名文章《谱写中乌友好新华章》
谱写中乌友好新华章
A Glorious New Chapter in China-Uzbekistan Friendship
中华人民共和国主席  习近平
H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
“绿野草铺茵，空山雪积银。”这是600多年前明代中国官员出使中亚后写下的诗句。乌兹别克斯坦的壮美景色自古为中国人所熟知和向往。2013年9月，我第一次访问美丽的乌兹别克斯坦，这里独具特色的自然风光、积淀千年的历史文化、勤劳智慧的人民给我留下深刻印象。
“Grass-covered land is lush green and snow-clad mountains are translucent and silvery,” to quote a poem written by a Chinese envoy in Ming Dynasty after his mission to Central Asia over 600 years ago. The magnificent landscape of Uzbekistan is familiar to and admired by the Chinese people since ancient times. I first visited your beautiful country in September 2013 and was deeply impressed by its distinct natural scenery, time-honored history and cultural heritage, and the hard-working and talented people.
在这草木葱茏的时节，应卡里莫夫总统邀请，我将再次访问乌兹别克斯坦，并出席上海合作组织塔什干峰会。我对此行充满期待。
At this fascinating time of lush green, I will once again visit Uzbekistan and attend the Summit of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in Tashkent at the invitation of President Islam Karimov. This is a visit I am very much looking forward to.
中乌两国人民勤劳勇敢、诚实守诺、重情重义，对家国天下有着相似的理解。2000多年前，古老的丝绸之路将中乌两国和两国人民连接在一起，拉开了双方互通有无、互学互鉴的友谊大幕。中国西汉张骞、大唐玄奘、明代陈诚曾经出使或途经乌兹别克斯坦，纳沃伊、兀鲁伯、花拉子米等乌兹别克斯坦历史文化名人的作品和思想在中国流传。中西文化在中亚彼此交融，乌兹别克斯坦从中发挥了重要桥梁作用。千百年来，中国同乌兹别克斯坦保持密切联系，形成相互交好的优良传统，为今天中乌睦邻友好关系打下了坚实基础。
The people of our two countries are diligent, courageous and honest. They cherish friendship and share similar views on personal dedication to the welfare of the nation and the world. Over 2,000 years ago, the ancient Silk Road connected China and Uzbekistan and has since witnessed the growth of two-way trade, mutual learning and people-to-people friendship. Zhang Qian in Western Han Dynasty, Xuan Zang in Tang Dynasty and Chen Cheng in Ming Dynasty traveled to Uzbekistan as an envoy or for a stopover. Renowned historical and cultural figures in Uzbekistan such as Alisher Navoi, Mirza Ulugbek and Muhammad Al Khwarizmi are known in China for their works and thoughts. Central Asia is the meeting place of Chinese and Western cultures, and Uzbekistan has played an important role as a bridge of communication. Over the centuries, China and Uzbekistan have maintained close contacts and fostered a fine tradition of friendly exchanges, thus laying a solid foundation for the good-neighborly relations we enjoy today.
乌兹别克斯坦是中亚大国，中国始终从战略高度和长远角度看待中乌关系。在乌兹别克斯坦独立之初，中国率先同乌兹别克斯坦建立外交关系。24年来，中乌关系经受住时间和国际风云变幻的考验，保持健康稳定发展势头。双方在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互坚定支持，各领域合作取得丰硕成果。
Uzbekistan is a major country in Central Asia. China views its relations with Uzbekistan from a strategic and long-term perspective. China was among the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with Uzbekistan shortly after its independence. Over the past 24 years, bilateral relations have stood the test of time and changes in the international landscape and kept a momentum of sound and steady growth. Our two sides have rendered each other firm support on issues concerning our respective core interests and achieved fruitful results in cooperation in various fields.
2013年以来，我同卡里莫夫总统以会晤、通话、互致信函等多种方式保持密切交往，建立起良好的工作关系和深厚的个人友谊。双方签署了《中乌友好合作条约》、《中乌2014年至2018年战略伙伴关系发展规划》等重要文件，双边关系的政治和法律基础更加牢固。双方共建“一带一路”，加紧国家战略对接，创新合作驱动，加强国际协作和安全合作。中乌合作领域越来越宽，合作质量越来越高，双边关系已经进入快速发展的黄金时期。
Since 2013, President Karimov and I have stayed in close touch by way of meetings, phone calls and correspondence, and have developed good working relations and deep personal friendship. Our two sides have signed such important documents as the Treaty on Friendly Cooperation and the Development Plan for the Strategic Partnership (2014-2018), thus cementing the political and legal foundation of bilateral relations. We are jointly building the Belt and Road, synergizing our national strategies, seeking innovative drivers for cooperation, and enhancing international coordination and security cooperation. With bilateral cooperation growing in both breadth and depth, China-Uzbekistan relations have entered a golden era of rapid development.
当前，共建“一带一路”是中乌合作的亮点和主线。政策沟通方面，中乌签署了共建“一带一路”合作文件，正在研究编制中乌合作规划纲要。中方赞赏乌方率先成为亚洲基础设施投资银行创始成员国。
Jointly building the Belt and Road is a highlight and priority in our bilateral cooperation. In policy communication, our two countries have signed the cooperation document on jointly building the Belt and Road and are working on an outline of cooperation plan. China appreciates that Uzbekistan was one of the first countries to express interest in the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and has joined it as a founding member.
2015年，中乌双边贸易额35亿美元，是建交初期的70多倍，中国连续3年成为乌兹别克斯坦第一大投资来源国和第二大贸易伙伴。中国－中亚天然气管道4条管线全部过境乌兹别克斯坦。双方今年2月建成了中亚第一长隧道“安格连－帕普”铁路隧道，成为连接中国和中亚交通走廊的新枢纽。双方都支持修建中吉乌铁路，愿同有关国家共同推动商谈工作。双方共同实施了轮胎厂、聚氯乙烯厂、碱厂项目，开展了棉花加工合作，落户中乌工业园的瓷砖、智能手机、制革、制鞋项目已经初具规模。可以说，双方共建“一带一路”合作已经取得重要早期收获。
In 2015, our two-way trade reached 3.5 billion U.S. dollars, up by more than 70-fold compared with the early days of our diplomatic relations. China has been Uzbekistan’s biggest source of investment and second largest trading partner for three years. All four pipelines of the China-Central Asia natural gas pipeline system run through Uzbekistan. In February this year, our two sides completed the construction of the Angren-Pap railway tunnel, the longest of its kind in Central Asia and a new link in the transportation corridor connecting China and Central Asia. Both sides support the building of a railway linking China, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan and will reach out to the relevant country to make progress in the project. Our two countries have jointly established plants for the production of tire, PVC and soda, carried out cooperation in cotton processing, and registered initial success in the production of ceramic tiles, smart phones, leather products and shoes in the China-Uzbekistan Industrial Park. It is fair to say that important “early harvests” have been achieved in our cooperation on the Belt and Road.
中乌都有着悠久历史和灿烂文化。人文交往一直是中乌关系的重要组成部分。近年来，双方在互派留学生、汉语教学、地方交往、联合考古、互译文学作品方面合作取得新进展，两国民众友好感情日益深厚。人文合作成为凝聚两国人民情感的纽带。双方合作办学的塔什干孔子学院是中亚第一所孔子学院，11年来培养了3000多名中乌友好使者。中国国家文物局、中国社会科学院、中国西北大学等单位积极同乌方开展联合考古和古迹修复工作，为恢复丝绸之路历史风貌作出了重要努力。前不久，乌兹别克斯坦汉学家将中国著名作家老舍的《猫城记》翻译成乌兹别克语出版发行，相信它会为乌兹别克斯坦人民了解中国文学打开一扇窗户。
Both China and Uzbekistan have a long history and splendid culture. People-to-people and cultural exchanges have been part and parcel of our bilateral relations. In recent years, the two sides have made fresh progress in student exchange programs, Chinese language training, sub-national exchanges, joint archaeological projects and translation of literary works. As a result of these, the friendship between our peoples has deepened. Cultural cooperation has brought our peoples closer. Thanks to our good collaboration, the first Confucius Institute in Central Asia was opened in Tashkent 11 years ago and has since produced more than 3,000 “ambassadors” promoting China-Uzbekistan friendship. The State Administration of Cultural Heritage of China, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences and the Northwest University of China have worked actively with Uzbekistan on joint archaeological research and restoration, making important contributions to restoring the historical sites of the Silk Road. Just recently, the Uzbek edition of the Cat Country, a novel written by renowned Chinese writer Lao She and translated by a Uzbek sinologist, has been published. I trust it will open another window for people in Uzbekistan to know more about Chinese literature. 
中乌是平等互利、安危与共、合作共赢的利益共同体和命运共同体。当前，实现国家发展和民族复兴是中乌两国人民孜孜以求的梦想。在当前国际格局深刻演变、世界经济复苏放缓、各国仍然面临发展重任的背景下，中乌加强全面合作顺应历史潮流，符合两国和两国人民根本利益。我们希望中乌共同发展繁荣之路越走越宽、越走越顺。
China and Uzbekistan are a community of common interest and shared future featuring equality, solidarity and win-win cooperation. To pursue development and national renewal is the dream of both our peoples. Given the deep changes in the international landscape, slow recovery in the world economy and daunting tasks of development for all countries, to enhance our bilateral cooperation in all respects meets the trend of history and serves the fundamental interest of our two countries and peoples. We hope that China and Uzbekistan will make greater achievements in the pursuit of common development and prosperity.
——我们要增强政治互信、加大相互支持。中国古代思想家孔子说：“与朋友交，言而有信。”政治互信是中乌关系健康发展的重要保障。双方将继续在涉及彼此国家主权、安全、发展等核心利益问题上相互坚定支持。中方坚定支持乌兹别克斯坦根据本国国情自主选择的发展道路，理解和尊重乌兹别克斯坦政府为保持国内稳定、促进经济社会发展所采取的措施，反对外部势力干涉乌兹别克斯坦内政。
– We need to enhance political mutual trust and mutual support. The ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius said, “In his dealings with friends, one should be trustworthy in what he says.” Political mutual trust is an important basis for the sound growth of China-Uzbekistan relations. We will continue to extend each other firm support on issues concerning each other’s core interests such as sovereignty, security and development. China firmly supports Uzbekistan in its independent choice of a development path that suits its national conditions, understands and respects the measures taken by the Uzbek government for national stability and economic and social development, and opposes interference by external forces in Uzbekistan’s internal affairs.
——我们要做好共建“一带一路”这篇大文章，在互利共赢基础上开辟更广阔合作空间。在加强能源资源合作的同时，拓展非资源领域合作，努力构建结构优化、条件便利的中乌经贸新格局。寻找利益契合点，因地制宜深化产能合作，将经济互补优势转化为更多实实在在的合作成果。
– We need to work together to ensure the success of the major initiative of the Belt and Road and explore broader space for cooperation based on mutual benefit. While strengthening cooperation in the energy and resources sector, we also need to explore other areas of cooperation, facilitate bilateral trade and make it better-structured. We should seek converging interests, deepen production capacity cooperation in light of local conditions and translate our economic complementarity into more tangible outcomes of cooperation.
——我们要精心打造中乌民心相通工程，通过深化文化、教育、旅游、考古、地方合作提升中乌作为丝绸之路古国的自豪感和自信心。发挥两所孔子学院纽带作用，加强青年学生交流，培养更多中乌友好事业接班人。支持中国“欢乐春节”和乌兹别克斯坦“东方韵律”访演活动，鼓励品牌节目和优秀文艺作品深入民间。
– We need to increase understanding between our peoples and deepen cultural, education, tourism, archaeological and sub-national cooperation to foster a greater sense of pride and confidence in China and Uzbekistan, both ancient civilizations along the Silk Road. We should leverage the two Confucius Institutes in Uzbekistan as bridges between our youth and nurture China-Uzbekistan friendship among future generations. We need to support cultural events such as the Chinese “Happy Spring Festival” and the Uzbek “Oriental Charm” staged in each other’s country and bring well-received performances and fine artistic works to more people.
——我们要践行共同、综合、合作、可持续安全观，深化中乌执法安全合作。加强形势研判和信息交流，严厉打击“三股势力”和贩毒等跨国有组织犯罪，共同营造地区和平发展的安全环境，维护两国人民生命财产安全。
– We need to implement the concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security and deepen China-Uzbekistan law enforcement and security cooperation. It is important that we have a keen understanding of the security situation, step up information sharing, combat the “three forces of terrorism, separatism and extremism,” drug-trafficking and other forms of transnational organized crime so that we can jointly foster a secure environment for peaceful development of the region and ensure the safety of our peoples and their property.
——我们要加强在国际事务中的战略协作，深化在联合国、上海合作组织等多边舞台上的协调和配合。坚定支持对方提出的建设性国际倡议，及时就全球经济治理、能源安全、水资源等全球性问题和阿富汗、西亚北非局势等地区和热点问题交换意见，共同维护好两国战略利益。中方支持乌方在国际事务中发挥更大作用。
– We need to enhance strategic coordination in international affairs and deepen our coordination in multilateral fora such as the United Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). We should give firm support to each other’s constructive international initiatives, exchange views in a timely manner on global issues such as global economic governance, energy security and water resources, and on regional and hot-spot issues such as Afghanistan and the situation in West Asia and North Africa to jointly uphold our strategic interests. China supports Uzbekistan in playing a bigger role in international affairs.
我这次在乌兹别克斯坦的另一项重要日程是出席上海合作组织塔什干峰会。今年是上海合作组织成立15周年，本次峰会对总结上海合作组织发展经验、规划未来合作方向具有重要意义。15年来，上海合作组织弘扬互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”，积极倡导开放包容、合作共赢的新型国际关系，为促进地区稳定和繁荣作出重要贡献。
Another important part of my agenda in Uzbekistan is to attend the SCO summit in Tashkent. This year marks the 15th anniversary of the SCO, and this summit will be an important occasion for us to review past experience and plan for future cooperation. Over the past 15 years, the SCO, guided by the “Shanghai Spirit” featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diverse civilizations and pursuit of common development, has actively advocated a new type of international relations featuring openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation and contributed significantly to regional stability and prosperity.
上海合作组织签署和执行打击“三股势力”上海公约、成员国边防合作协定等文件，定期举行联合反恐演习，有力遏制了本地区跨国犯罪和恐怖极端组织活动，有效抵御了成员国共同面临的安全风险。上海合作组织在经贸、交通、能源、基础设施建设、农业、人文等领域不断深化务实合作，推动了成员国经济社会发展，使睦邻友好和互利共赢的理念深植人心。随着扩员进程启动，上海合作组织朋友圈不断扩大，地域涵盖中亚、南亚、西亚、东南亚，组织合作潜力大大增强，国际地位和影响力持续提升。
The SCO members have signed and implemented a number of agreements including the Shanghai Convention on combating the “three forces” and the border control cooperation agreement, and held joint counter-terrorism drills on a regular basis. These efforts have effectively deterred transnational crime and terrorist and extremist activities in this region and diffused security risks for all member states. In areas such as economy and trade, transportation, energy, infrastructure, agriculture and people-to-people exchange, deeper cooperation under the SCO framework has advanced the members states’ economic and social development and taken to people’s heart the concept of good-neighborly friendship and mutual benefit. As the SCO starts to admit new members, its circle of friends is expanding to countries in Central Asia, South Asia, West Asia and Southeast Asia. As a result, the SCO’s cooperation potential will go up significantly and its international standing and influence will also be on the rise.
乌兹别克斯坦作为上海合作组织轮值主席国，为推动组织各领域合作取得实际成果作出了积极贡献。中方愿同乌方及其他成员国一道努力，以塔什干峰会为新起点，全面提高合作水平，使上海合作组织更好造福地区和各国人民。
As the rotating chair of the SCO this year, Uzbekistan has done a lot to secure tangible outcomes of cooperation in various fields. China stands ready to work with Uzbekistan and other member states and take the Tashkent summit as a new starting point to further enhance cooperation across the board so that the SCO will bring more benefits to this region and its people.
今年是乌兹别克斯坦独立25周年。我对此表示祝贺。在卡里莫夫总统领导下，乌兹别克斯坦国家建设事业取得令人瞩目的成就，国际影响力不断增强。乌兹别克斯坦政府奉行发展服务人民的宗旨，将经济增长成果更多惠及普通民众，先后实施“青年人年”、“儿童健康年”、“关爱老人年”、“母婴健康年”等国家特别方案，形成了民生不断改善、城乡均衡发展的良好局面。乌方已经成功探索出符合本国国情的乌兹别克斯坦模式。中方祝愿乌兹别克斯坦国家建设事业取得更大成果。
This year marks the 25th anniversary of the independence of Uzbekistan, and I wish to congratulate Uzbekistan on that. Under the leadership of President Karimov, Uzbekistan has made remarkable achievements in its national development and gained greater international influence. The Uzbek government has adopted a people-centered approach to ensure that economic growth will truly benefit the people. A number of national programs have been adopted such as the “Year of Youth,” “Year of Healthy Child,” “Year of Attention and Care for the Elderly” and “Year of Healthy Mother and Child.” As a result, people’s livelihood has been improving steadily and there is balanced development between urban and rural areas. Uzbekistan has embarked on a path of development that suits its national reality, and China wishes Uzbekistan even greater success in national development.
乌兹别克斯坦谚语说：“只有结满果实的大树才会引人注意。”中乌全方位合作已经结出累累硕果，造福两国人民，也得到两国人民拥护和支持。我相信，在实现各自国家发展振兴的征途上，中乌两国一定能够携手同行，谱写中乌友好新华章。
A Uzbek proverb goes, “A tree gets attention only when it bears fruits.” China-Uzbekistan cooperation across the board has yielded fruitful results, and has benefited and won the support of our two peoples. I believe that in realizing our respective national development and rejuvenation, our two countries will join hands and write a glorious new chapter of China-Uzbekistan friendship.
91. 习近平在伊朗媒体发表署名文章《共创中伊关系美好明天》
共创中伊关系美好明天
中华人民共和国主席
习近
Work Together for a Bright Future of China-Iran Relations
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
我将应鲁哈尼总统邀请对伊朗进行国事访问，就新形势下深化中伊关系及重大国际和地区问题深入交换意见，共同推动中伊关系迈上新台阶。	
As I am about to embark on my state visit to Iran at the invitation of President Rouhani, I am looking forward to in-depth exchange of views on deepening China-Iran relations in the new era as well as on major international and regional issues and working together with my Iranian hosts to bring the relationship to a new stage.
这是我第一次访问伊朗，但同很多中国人一样，我对你们古老而美丽的国度并不陌生，因为丝绸之路早就把我们两个伟大民族联结在一起。史书记载下一个又一个精彩故事。	
This will be my first trip to Iran, yet like many other Chinese, I do not feel like a stranger in your ancient and beautiful country, thanks to the Silk Road that linked our two great nations for centuries and to the many legendary stories recorded in history books of our friendly exchanges.
早在2000多年前的中国西汉时期，中国使者张骞的副使就来到伊朗，受到隆重接待。7世纪后的中国唐宋时期，许多伊朗人前往中国求学行医经商，足迹遍及西安、广州等地。13世纪，伊朗著名诗人萨迪记录下到中国新疆喀什的难忘游历。15世纪，中国明代郑和7次率领庞大船队远洋航海，其中3次到达伊朗南部的霍尔木兹地区。	
Over 2,000 years ago during the West Han Dynasty in China, the Chinese envoy Zhang Qian's deputy came to Iran and received warm welcome. Seven centuries later during the Tang and Song dynasties, many Iranians came to China's Xi'an and Guangzhou to study, practice medicine and do business. In the 13th century, the famous Iranian poet Saadi wrote about his unforgettable travel to Kashgar, Xinjiang. In the 15th century, a renowned Chinese navigator Zheng He from the Ming Dynasty led seven maritime expeditions, which took him to Hormuz in southern Iran three times.
来自中国的丝绸和伊朗的高超工艺结合，成就了波斯丝毯的高贵；来自伊朗的苏麻离青和中国的高超工艺结合，成就了青花瓷器的雅致。中国的漆器、陶器以及造纸、冶金、印刷、火药等技术经伊朗传向亚洲最西端乃至欧洲等更远的地方，石榴、葡萄、橄榄以及玻璃、金银器皿等又从伊朗和欧洲等地传入中国。	
The much-prized Persian carpet is weaved out of a fusion of China's silk and Iran's sophisticated techniques. And the exquisite blue and white porcelain is produced thanks to a mixture of Iran's "smaltum" (a type of material containing cobalt, unique to Iran) and China's advanced skills. Via Iran, China's lacquerware, pottery, as well as papermaking, metallurgical, printing and gunpowder making skills were spread to the west end of Asia, and further on to Europe. And from Iran and Europe, pomegranate, grape, olive, as well as glass, gold and silver ware were introduced into China.
驼铃相闻，舟楫相望。沿着绵延万千公里的陆上和海上丝绸之路，两大文明远行并拥抱，两国人民远行并交好。正如萨迪在诗中写道，“久远，方值得留恋”。	
It almost seemed that our two countries were just a camel-ride or a boat trip away from each other. Indeed, the thousand-mile-long land and maritime silk roads made it possible for two ancient civilizations and peoples to embrace and befriend each other. As Saadi wrote, those that are far away and are of times long past deserve to be cherished more.
如果说历史上中伊两国为建设丝绸之路、促进东西方文明双向交融作出过重要贡献，那么两国建交45年来的友好交往正是对“和平合作、开放包容、互学互鉴、互利共赢”的丝绸之路精神的继承和诠释。	
In history, China and Iran made important contribution to opening the Silk Road and promoting exchanges between Eastern and Western civilizations. The China-Iran friendly exchanges in the 45 years of our diplomatic relations have continued to embody the Silk Road spirit of peace, cooperation, openness, inclusiveness, mutual learning and mutual benefit.
1971年建交以来，中伊关系经受住国际风云变幻考验，保持健康稳定的发展势头。双方相互理解，相互信任，患难与共。在伊朗核问题全面协议谈判中，中方赞赏伊朗无意发展核武的承诺，支持伊朗维护自身正当权益，充分肯定伊朗为推动协议达成作出的积极贡献。下一阶段，我们愿与伊方密切合作，确保协议顺利实施。经贸上，中伊双边贸易额从上世纪70年代的几千万美元增长到2014年的518亿美元，中国连续6年保持伊朗第一大贸易伙伴国地位。两国人文交流十分密切，“相知无远近，万里尚为邻”，两国人民友谊已经成为中伊友好关系发展的重要动力。	
Since the inception of our diplomatic ties in 1971, the China-Iran relationship has stood the test of international changes and maintained a momentum of sound and steady development. We have given each other mutual understanding and mutual trust in good times and bad. On the nuclear issue, China appreciates Iran's assurance of not intending to develop nuclear weapons, supports Iran in upholding its legitimate rights and interests, and fully recognizes Iran's contribution to the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). In the next stage, we will work closely with Iran to ensure the smooth implementation of the JCPOA. Economically, our bilateral trade jumped from tens of millions of U.S. dollars in 1970s to 51.8 billion dollars in 2014, and China has stayed Iran's biggest trading partner for six years in a row. Our two countries have also enjoyed very close people-to-people and cultural ties. As a Chinese saying goes, good friends feel close even when they are thousands of miles apart. The friendship between our peoples has become a significant driver of the friendly relations between our two countries.
两国领导人保持经常性接触和往来，对双边关系发展具有重要引领作用。近年来，我同鲁哈尼总统多次会面，特别是在去年9月联合国成立70周年系列峰会期间，我们就全面发展新时期中伊关系达成重要共识。	
Frequent contacts and exchanges between leaders of our two countries play a major role in guiding the growth of our bilateral relations. In the past few years, President Rouhani and I have met many times. In particular, our meeting held on the sidelines of the summits commemorating the 70th anniversary of the UN last September yielded important agreement on growing China-Iran relations in an all-round way in the new era.
2013年，我提出共建丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路倡议，得到伊朗积极回应。作为古丝绸之路上的重要两站，中国和伊朗都对振兴这一和平之路、友谊之路、合作之路寄予很高期望。当前，中国正在制定和实施国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划，伊朗也即将推进经济发展第六个五年计划，双方发展战略契合，合作潜力巨大。	
In 2013, I put forward the proposal of jointly building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, which received positive response from Iran. As two important stops on the ancient Silk Road, both China and Iran have high expectations for reviving this road of peace, friendship and cooperation. China is soon to implement the 13th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development. Iran will also carry out the sixth five-year plan for economic development. Our development strategies are highly compatible, which creates huge potential for cooperation.
我认为，中伊在“一带一路”框架内的合作可以集中在以下方面。	
Cooperation between China and Iran under the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative may focus on the following areas:
——增强政治互信，筑牢合作之基。“信则立，不信则废。”人与人、国与国的交往概莫能外。古丝绸之路沿线国家在2000多年交往中积累了信任，深化了友谊，促进了合作。建交45年来，中伊两国克服困难和阻力，传统友谊历久弥坚，务实合作成果丰硕。今天，我们更要坚持上述精神，加强政策沟通，照顾彼此关切，凝聚更多共识，为合作奠定更加坚实的基础。我们将建立全面战略伙伴关系，密切政党、立法机构、地方等方面交往，深化双方在上海合作组织、亚信、联合国等多边框架内合作，不断增进政治互信，丰富战略关系内涵。	
-- Enhancing political mutual trust to cement the foundation for cooperation. Mutual trust ensures success while distrust spells failure. This is true for state-to-state relations as well as interpersonal relationship. Countries along the ancient Silk Road have built trust, deepened friendship and enhanced cooperation through their exchanges stretching over 2,000 years. Over the past 45 years of diplomatic relations, China and Iran have enhanced traditional friendship and achieved fruitful results in practical cooperation despite difficulties and obstacles. Today, we need all the more to build on this positive spirit to step up policy communication, accommodate each other's concerns, build more consensus and lay a more solid foundation for our cooperation. We will establish a comprehensive strategic partnership and increase exchanges between political parties, legislatures and at the sub-national levels. We will deepen our cooperation under multilateral frameworks such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) and the UN, to steadily increase political mutual trust and substantiate our strategic relationship.
——坚持互利共赢，共享繁荣发展。经过30多年改革开放，中国经济得到历史性发展，经济总量居世界第二。中国在资金、技术、装备等方面已经形成较大优势。伊朗资源丰富，劳动力充足，市场潜力大，处于推进工业化、现代化进程的关键阶段。中伊资源禀赋和合作优势互补性强。随着伊朗核问题全面协议的达成和执行，中伊关系将迎来新的发展契机。中方将秉持合作共赢理念，加强中伊发展战略对接，深化互利合作，各施所长，各尽所能，更多惠及民众，实现共同繁荣。	
-- Pursuing win-win outcomes and common prosperity. After more than 30 years of reform and opening up, the Chinese economy has undergone a historic transformation, now ranking the second in the world. China has considerable strength in capital, technologies, equipment and other areas. Iran has rich resources, ample labor force and huge market potential, and it is in the crucial stage of industrialization and modernization. The resource endowments and comparative advantages of China and Iran are highly complementary. The implementation of the JCPOA will bring new opportunities for the growth of China-Iran relations. China will work to synergize its development strategy with that of Iran and deepen win-win cooperation to fully exert respective strengths for the benefit of our peoples and to achieve greater common prosperity.
——促进互联互通，扩大务实合作。互联互通是贯穿“一带一路”的血脉。实现互联互通，要以亚洲国家为重点方向，以交通基础设施为突破口。中方在铁路、电力、通信、工程机械、冶金、建材等领域优势明显、竞争力强，并于2014年出资400亿美元成立丝路基金，以支持“一带一路”沿线国家有关合作项目。伊朗位于亚洲东西交通要冲，区位优势明显。中方愿同伊方在公路、铁路、海路、网路领域深化合作，推进亚洲东西通道建设，并以此带动沿线国家贸易和投资便利化，降低人员、商品、资金跨境流动成本，巩固扩大能源资源和产业合作。	
-- Promoting connectivity and expanding practical cooperation. Connectivity is the artery of the Belt and Road Initiative. In building connectivity, we should give priority to Asian countries and start with transportation infrastructure. China has a strong competitive edge in areas such as railway, electricity, telecommunications, mechanical engineering, metallurgy and construction materials. We committed 40 billion dollars to the establishment of a Silk Road Fund in 2014 to support relevant cooperation projects in countries along the Belt and Road. Iran is strategically located and has distinctive geographical advantages. China is ready to deepen cooperation with Iran on building roads, railway, sea routes and the Internet, and facilitating East-West connectivity in Asia and on this basis better promote trade and investment liberalization among countries along the Belt and Road, lower the cost of the cross-border movement of people, goods and capital and expand energy, resources and industrial cooperation.
——秉持开放包容，鼓励文明交流。中国人说：“人之相知，贵在知心。”波斯谚语说：“人心之间，有路相通。”不同国家、不同民族、不同文明之间，应该坚持交流互鉴、和谐共存。中伊文化各有所长。中伊人民在长期友好交往中相互学习，取长补短。我们要加强文化、教育、新闻、出版、旅游等领域交流，鼓励青年和学生交往，让丝绸之路精神薪火相传，让两国人民心与心相通、手和手相连。	
-- Upholding openness and inclusiveness and encouraging inter-civilization exchange. The Chinese people often say, the value of friendship lies in heart-to-heart communication. A Persian proverb also goes, there is telepathy between hearts. Different countries, nations and civilizations should carry out exchanges and mutual learning and live in harmony with each other. Both the Chinese and Iranian cultures have unique strengths and the two peoples have benefited from mutual learning for centuries. We need to step up exchanges in culture, education, information, publishing, tourism and other fields and encourage more exchanges between the youth and students, so that the spirit of the Silk Road will be passed on from generation to generation and our peoples will develop enduring bonds.
丹葩结秀，华实并丽。石榴早已从伊朗到中国落户，又因果实累累在中国被赋予新的寓意，象征兴旺繁荣。它见证了中伊两国人民沿着丝绸之路开展友好交往的历史，预示着两国合作还将收获更多硕果。	
Pomegranate is well-liked in China for its crimson flower and bountiful seeds, for which it came to symbolize plentifulness and prosperity. Introduced from Iran to China centuries ago, the fruit bears witness to the history of friendly exchanges between the Chinese and Iranians along the Silk Road and augurs even more fruitful cooperation between our two countries.
北京和德黑兰相距万里，但再远的距离也不能阻挡中伊相互走近、增进合作，不能阻挡两国人民友好交往、深化友谊。我们愿同伊方携手努力，传承丝绸之路精神，共创中伊关系美好明天。	
The long distance between Beijing and Tehran is no obstacle to the interaction or cooperation between China and Iran, nor to the friendship and exchanges between our peoples. China is ready to join hands with Iran to renew the Silk Road spirit and create an ever better future for China-Iran relations.
76 习近平在厄瓜多尔媒体发表署名文章《搭建中厄友好合作的新桥》
搭建中厄友好合作的新桥　
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
Build A New Bridge of China-Ecuador Friendship and Cooperation
By Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
应科雷亚总统邀请，我即将对厄瓜多尔进行国事访问。这是中厄建交以来中国国家主席首次访问厄瓜多尔。我带着中国人民的友好情谊和发展两国关系的良好愿望而来，期待搭建起连接中厄两国新的友好合作之桥。	
At the invitation of President Rafael Correa, I will pay a state visit to Ecuador, the first visit by a Chinese president to Ecuador since our two countries established diplomatic ties. I will bring with me the good will of the Chinese people and their best wishes for an ever-growing bilateral relationship, and I hope my visit will help build a new bridge of friendship and cooperation connecting our two countries.
厄瓜多尔是我这次拉美之行的首站。美丽的“赤道之国”令人神往。这里有巍峨耸立的安第斯山脉、广袤神秘的亚马孙雨林、富饶美丽的太平洋沿岸、“活的生物进化博物馆”加拉帕戈斯群岛。厄瓜多尔人民同自然和谐共处，追寻着美好生活，国家发展焕发出勃勃生机活力。	
Ecuador will be the first stop of my upcoming trip to Latin America. The alluring "Republic of the Equator" is famous for its majestic Andes Mountains, vast and enigmatic Amazon rainforest, mesmerizing Pacific coast rich in natural resources, and the living museum of evolution of life, the Galapagos Islands. Living in harmony with nature, the Ecuadorian people work hard in pursuit of a better life. And the country is making robust progress in its development.
“志合者，不以山海为远。”中国和厄瓜多尔虽然远隔重洋，但友谊的纽带将我们紧紧相连。今年4月，厄瓜多尔遭受强烈地震灾害。在突如其来的灾难面前，中国政府和人民感同身受，第一时间向厄瓜多尔政府和人民提供了力所能及的援助。在厄瓜多尔的中资企业和华侨华人同当地人民肩并肩、手牵手，共同抗震救灾，谱写了中厄友好新赞歌。	
As a Chinese saying goes, "Even mountains and seas cannot distance people with common aspirations." China and Ecuador share a close bond of friendship despite the long distance between us. In April, when Ecuador was hit by a strong earthquake, the deeply sympathetic Chinese government and people rushed to the aid of the Ecuadorian government and people. Chinese companies and Chinese communities in Ecuador stood shoulder to shoulder with the local people in the rescue and relief operations, writing a new chapter of China-Ecuador friendship.
我高兴地得知，在这次抗震救灾中，中国企业提供设备技术并负责建设的厄瓜多尔公共安全服务系统发挥了重要作用。作为指挥中枢，厄瓜多尔公共安全服务系统高效处理了大量信息，及时发出一道道指令，挽救了许多生命，降低了灾害带来的损失。作为厄瓜多尔的真诚朋友，我们将积极参与灾后重建，帮助灾区人民早日重建家园，早日恢复宁静美好的生活。	
I am glad to learn that ECU 911, the public security services system equipped and built by Chinese companies, played a vital role in the rescue and relief efforts. As the command and control center, ECU 911 effectively processed a massive amount of information and sent instructions without delay, thus saving numerous lives and preventing further damage. As Ecuador's sincere friend, China will take an active part in post-disaster reconstruction and help people in quake-hit areas rebuild their homes and get their life back to normal at an early date.
中国和厄瓜多尔都是发展中国家，有着相似的历史遭遇和共同的奋斗目标。建交36年来，我们相互理解、相互支持、相互帮助，积累了深厚的政治互信和友好情谊。中方坚定支持厄瓜多尔人民探索符合本国国情的发展道路，支持厄方为实现经济多元化发展所作的努力，支持厄方在国际和地区事务中发挥积极作用。	
Both China and Ecuador are developing countries with similar historical experience and shared development goals. Over the past 36 years since our two countries established diplomatic relations, we have forged deep political trust and friendship through mutual understanding, mutual support and mutual assistance. China firmly supports Ecuadorian people in exploring a development path suited to their national conditions. It also supports Ecuador in diversifying its economy and playing an active role in regional and international affairs.
中国始终从战略高度和长远角度看待和发展同厄瓜多尔关系。2015年1月，我同科雷亚总统一道宣布两国建立战略伙伴关系，两国政治互信和战略合作由此获得了新的强劲动力。当前，两国各领域互利合作硕果累累，呈现出全方位、宽领域、大规模特点。	
China views and grows its relations with Ecuador from a strategic and long-term perspective. In January 2015, President Rafael Correa and I announced the establishment of a strategic partnership between the two countries, giving a fresh and strong boost to our political trust and strategic cooperation. Since then, we have carried out fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation across the board featuring more dimensions, wider areas and larger scales.
两国贸易交流持续快速发展，中国成为厄瓜多尔第三大贸易伙伴。2015年，双边贸易额达到41亿美元，10年来翻了两番，而且仍然具有巨大潜力。厄瓜多尔香蕉、对虾质量上乘，已进入中国市场。我们希望看到更多厄瓜多尔特色产品和高附加值产品出口到中国，丰富中国市场。	
Trade ties continue to grow rapidly, with China becoming Ecuador's third largest trading partner. Two-way trade reached 4.1 billion U.S. dollars in 2015, quadrupling in just 10 years and promising huge, untapped potential. In addition to high-quality Ecuadorian bananas and prawns that have already entered the Chinese market, we look forward to having more local specialties and high value-added products from Ecuador to increase variety in the Chinese market.
两国投资和融资合作增长迅猛，厄瓜多尔是吸引中国投资和融资最多的拉美国家之一。中国在厄瓜多尔各类投资和融资超过百亿美元，支持了包括科卡科多－辛克雷水电站在内数百个项目，其中包括8个水电站、10余条公路等大型基础设施建设项目。这些项目建成后，厄瓜多尔发展将拥有强有力的火车头、发动机。我们感谢厄方对中国企业、中国设备、中国技术的信任。	
Investment and financing cooperation is growing exponentially. Ecuador is a top destination for Chinese investment and financing in Latin America. Chinese investment and financing in Ecuador has exceeded 10 billion U.S. dollars, supporting several hundred projects including major infrastructure projects such as the Coca Codo Sinclair hydropower plant, seven other hydropower plants and a dozen highways. Once up and running, these projects will equip Ecuador with a powerful locomotive and engine to propel its development further. We appreciate Ecuador's trust in Chinese companies, equipment and technologies.
两国人文交流精彩纷呈，双方在文化、教育、卫生、体育、司法等领域交往合作不断增多。双方在对方国家举办的文艺演出和文化展览，生动展示了本国文化精髓，引起当地民众的共鸣，越来越多中国人希望去厄瓜多尔旅游观光。	
People-to-people and cultural exchange has been vibrant, as evidenced by the growing interactions and cooperation in culture, education, health, sports and justice. We have presented cultural performances and exhibitions in each other's country. Such showcase of each other's cultural essence has been warmly welcomed by our people. As a result, more and more Chinese tourists aspire for opportunities to visit Ecuador.
高技术合作是我们两国合作的一大亮点。2013年，厄方的“飞马”卫星由中国火箭成功发射。中方对能够帮助厄方实现卫星梦感到由衷高兴。中国发展经验告诉我们，科学技术是第一生产力。中方理解厄方科技兴国的努力，以实际行动提供支持，先后派出8名科学家参与厄方“普罗米修斯”人才引进计划，在雅查伊智慧城开设联合实验室，并在厄瓜多尔举办两国科技合作混合委员会会议、中国－拉丁美洲和加勒比国家共同体科技创新论坛等。	
High-tech cooperation is another highlight of our bilateral cooperation. In 2013, Pegaso nanosatellite was successfully launched aboard a Chinese rocket. China is heartily glad about being able to help Ecuador realize its satellite dream. Having learned from its own development experience that science and technology is a primary source of productivity, China understands Ecuador's pursuit of prosperity through advance in science and technology. It has offered support with concrete actions, including by sending eight scientists to participate in the Prometheus program, opening a joint research lab in the Yachay City of Knowledge, and holding the meeting of China-Ecuador Mixed Commission of Scientific and Technological Cooperation and the China-CELAC Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation.
中厄友好还体现在双方富有成效的多边协作上。中方赞赏厄方坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，不畏强权，勇于维护正义。中方对中厄在联合国改革、气候变化、可持续发展等重大国际问题上的合作感到满意，赞赏厄方在担任拉丁美洲和加勒比国家共同体轮值主席国和“四驾马车”成员期间积极推动中拉论坛建设和中拉整体合作。	
Our friendship is also reflected in productive multilateral coordination. China commends Ecuador's commitment to an independent foreign policy of peace and to upholding justice in defiance of power politics. China appreciates its cooperation with Ecuador on major international issues such as UN reform, climate change and sustainable development, and applauds Ecuador's active efforts, in its capacity as CELAC rotating presidency and a member of Quartet, to promote the development of China-CELAC Forum and the overall cooperation between China and Latin American and Caribbean countries.
当前，中厄关系拥有稳固政治互信、深厚利益融合、广阔合作空间，两国战略伙伴关系具备全面发展的有利条件。我愿在这次访问期间，同科雷亚总统和厄瓜多尔各界朋友深入交流，推动中厄关系迈上新台阶。	
China-Ecuador relations enjoy solid political trust, converging interests and broad space for cooperation. With all these favorable conditions, our strategic partnership is poised to grow in an all-round way. I look forward to having in-depth exchanges with President Correa and friends from various sectors of Ecuador to take China-Ecuador relations to a new height.
——我们要做真诚互信的好伙伴。双方应该坚持从战略高度看待和推动两国关系发展，牢牢把握正确前进方向，确保中厄关系长期稳定健康发展。在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上，双方要相互理解和坚定支持，捍卫独立自主的发展权利。	
We shall be good partners treating each other with sincerity and trust. Our two sides need to look at and promote bilateral relations from a strategic height, keep to the right direction of development and ensure sustained, sound and steady growth of the relations. On issues concerning each other's core interests and major concerns, our two sides need to understand and firmly support each other and safeguard the right to independent development.
——我们要做共同发展的好伙伴。发展是硬道理。中国正在实施“十三五”发展规划，厄瓜多尔也在积极推进2013－2017年国家发展计划。我们要紧密结合各自发展战略，实现产业链紧密对接，推动务实合作向更高水平、更宽领域、更深层次发展。中方愿同厄方积极开展产能合作，加大向厄方技术转让，帮助厄方提高自主发展能力。	
We shall be good partners for common development. Development is what matters. China is implementing its 13th Five-Year Plan while Ecuador is advancing its National Development Plan (2013-2017). We need to seek complementarity between our respective development strategies and between our industrial chains, and deepen and upgrade practical cooperation in wider areas. China will carry out production capacity cooperation with Ecuador, increase technology transfer, and help Ecuador build greater capacity of independent development.
——我们要做世代友好的好伙伴。中厄两国都拥有优秀文明传统。我们要以两国人员往来便利化为契机，扩大文化、教育、卫生、体育、旅游、媒体、司法等领域交流合作，夯实民意基础。未来属于青年人。我们应该重视促进两国青年的交流往来，为中厄世代友好培养接班人。	
We shall be good partners enjoying ever-lasting friendship. Both China and Ecuador boast fine cultural heritage. We need to facilitate personnel flows in both directions and expand exchange in culture, education, health, sports, tourism, media and justice to cement popular support for bilateral ties. The future belongs to the young people. We need to prioritize youth exchanges and make sure that China-Ecuador friendship will be carried forward from generation to generation.
——我们要做南南合作的好伙伴。当前，世界形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，包括中国和厄瓜多尔在内的广大发展中国家要加强合作，共同应对挑战。中方祝贺厄瓜多尔将于2017年担任七十七国集团主席。双方应该保持密切沟通和配合，在重大国际和地区问题上协调统一立场，共同维护广大发展中国家利益。同时，我们也愿同厄瓜多尔等拉美国家一道，继续推进中拉论坛建设，不断扩大中拉整体合作。	
We shall be good partners for South-South cooperation. The world is undergoing profound and complex changes. Developing countries, China and Ecuador included, need to step up cooperation and jointly rise to challenges. China congratulates Ecuador on its forthcoming chairmanship of Group of 77 in 2017. Our two sides need to maintain close communication and collaboration, coordinate positions on major international and regional issues, and jointly safeguard the interests of developing countries. China will work with Ecuador and other Latin American and Caribbean countries to further develop China-CELAC Forum and expand China's cooperation with the region.
“兄弟同心，其利断金。”新形势下，中方愿同厄方携手努力，搭建起便于双方人民扩大友好交往的坚实桥梁，推动中厄关系向更高水平迈进。	
Another Chinese saying reads, "When brothers come together, there is nothing they cannot achieve." In the new circumstances, China will join hands with Ecuador to build a strong bridge for our two peoples to scale up friendly exchange and take our relations to a higher level.
92. 习近平在埃及媒体发表署名文章《让中阿友谊如尼罗河水奔涌向前》
让中阿友谊如尼罗河水奔涌向前
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
Let China-Arab Friendship Surge Forward like the Nile
By H. E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
应塞西总统邀请，我将对埃及进行国事访问。这是我担任中国国家主席后第一次访问中东和阿拉伯国家，也是我2016年的首次出访。我将同埃及和阿拉伯朋友共叙友情、共商合作、共话发展，期待此访成为一次友谊之旅、合作之旅、共赢之旅。	
At the invitation of President Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, I will pay a state visit to Egypt, my first to the Middle East and Arab countries as President of China and my first overseas visit in 2016. The purpose is to renew friendship, and discuss cooperation and development with Egyptian and Arab friends. I look forward to a trip of friendship, cooperation and mutual benefit.
“埃及是尼罗河的馈赠。”16年前，我第一次访问埃及时，实地看到古代埃及人民把周期泛滥的洪水转化为农业发展的重要资源，体会到尼罗河是孕育埃及文明的母亲河，也由衷赞美埃及人民智慧和力量。	
"Egypt is the gift of the Nile." When I first visited Egypt 16 years ago, I learned how people of ancient Egypt harnessed the Nile floods for agricultural production. I marveled at the Nile, mother of the Egyptian civilization, and was amazed by the wisdom and strength of the Egyptian people.
从那以后，壮美的尼罗河就深深印在了我的脑海里。	
Ever since then, the great Nile has been etched in my mind.
2014年年底以来，我同塞西总统两次在北京会面，双方共同决定把中埃关系提升为全面战略伙伴关系，推动中埃关系步入发展快车道。去年9月，塞西总统出席在北京举行的中国人民抗日战争暨世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年纪念活动，代表阿拉伯世界，发出了维护第二次世界大战胜利成果和战后国际秩序的正义呼声。	
Since late 2014, I have had two meetings with President al-Sisi in Beijing. Our agreement to elevate China-Egypt relations to a comprehensive strategic partnership led bilateral relations onto a fast track. President al-Sisis's trip to Beijing last September to attend commemorations of the 70th anniversary of the victory of the Chinese People's War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression and the World's Anti-fascist War was a just call made on behalf of the Arab world for upholding the victorious outcome of WWII and the post-war international order.
中国和埃及同为文明古国，两国人民友好交往追溯久远。2000多年前，中国汉代朝廷派遣使者前往亚历山大，古丝绸之路成为联系双方的重要纽带。	
Both China and Egypt are ancient civilization. Friendly exchanges between our peoples date back to antiquity. More than 2,000 years ago, the imperial court of China's Han Dynasty sent envoys to Alexandria. The ancient Silk Road was a bond linking up the two sides.
近代以来，中埃两国人民在反殖民、反霸权的斗争中同声相应、同气相求。60多年前，在万隆会议上，周恩来总理同纳赛尔总统的手紧紧握在一起，中埃两国由此携手合作，迈上共同维护广大发展中国家权益的征程。	
In the modern times, the people of China and Egypt have stood together in the fight against colonialism and hegemony. Over six decades ago, Premier Zhou Enlai and President Gamal Abdel Nasser shook hands at Bandung, Indonesia. China and Egypt have since joined hands and embarked on a common cause to uphold the rights and interests of developing countries.
在一个甲子的岁月里，中埃关系历经国际和地区风云变幻考验，始终健康稳步发展。双方相互理解和尊重，相互信任和支持，开展了富有成效的合作。中方支持埃及人民自主决定国家前途命运，支持埃及政府恢复社会稳定和经济发展的努力，支持埃及在地区和国际事务中发挥积极作用。	
Over the past six decades, China-Egypt relations have stood the test of changing international and regional landscapes and have moved forward steadily. The two sides have treated each other with mutual understanding, respect, trust and support, and have conducted fruitful cooperation. China supports the people of Egypt in making independent choices for the future of their own country. China supports the government of Egypt in restoring social stability and economic development. China supports Egypt in playing an active role in regional and international affairs.
中方将从战略高度和长远角度看待和发展对埃关系，我愿同塞西总统携手努力，全面深化两国政治互信和战略合作，实现共同发展和进步，使中埃关系这一南南合作的典范进一步发挥引领和示范作用。	
China will continue to view and develop its relations with Egypt from a strategic and long-term perspective. I and President al-Sisi will work together to comprehensively deepen the political trust and strategic cooperation between our two countries, so that China and Egypt will achieve common development and progress and China-Egypt relations, already a shining example of South-South cooperation, will continue to play its exemplary role.
埃及是第一个同中国建交的阿拉伯国家，中埃关系是中国同阿拉伯国家关系的起点，代表了中阿关系的高度和温度。60年来，中阿友好合作实现了历史性跨越，也积累了宝贵经验。双方坚持相互尊重、平等相待，无论国际风云如何变幻，都始终互为朋友、兄弟、伙伴。双方坚持互利共赢、共同发展，无论各自经历了什么发展变化，都始终追求共同利益、可持续发展。双方努力促进对话交流、文明互鉴，始终尊重对方的社会制度和发展道路。我们在长期交往和合作中始终坚持互信、互助、互利、互荣的原则，成为彼此信赖和依靠的好朋友、好兄弟、好伙伴。	
Egypt was the first Arab country to establish diplomatic ties with China. China's relations with Egypt marked the beginning of its relations with Arab countries and are indicative of the height and warmth of China-Arab relations. For over six decades, China-Arab friendship and cooperation have undergone historic transformation and we have gained much valuable experience. Despite changes in the international situation, the two sides respect and treat each other as equals, and have acted as each other's friend, brother and partner. We have a shared commitment to win-win cooperation and common development. However things may change, common interests and sustainable development have always been a common pursuit for both sides. We respect each other's social system and development path and have promoted dialogue among civilizations.China-Egypt interaction and cooperation over the years are guided by the principles of mutual trust, mutual assistance, mutual benefit and mutual prosperity. The two countries are indeed each other's good friend, good brother and good partner that can be counted on.
60年来，中阿关系全面发展、硕果累累。中国－阿拉伯国家集体合作也走过11个春秋。2014年，我出席在北京举行的中国－阿拉伯国家合作论坛第六届部长级会议开幕式，提出中阿共建“一带一路”的战略构想，并同阿拉伯朋友共同规划了未来10年中阿关系发展的蓝图。	
In the past six decades, China-Arab relations have achieved comprehensive development and yielded fruitful results. The collective cooperation between China and Arab countries has been going on for 11 years. When I attended the opening ceremony of the sixth Ministerial Meeting of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum in 2014, I put forward the strategic vision for China and Arab countries to jointly build the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. A blueprint was drawn by both sides to develop China-Arab relations in the coming decade.
中阿关系呈现蓬勃生机，迄今为止，已有埃及、阿尔及利亚、沙特、阿联酋、卡塔尔、苏丹、约旦、伊拉克等8个国家同中国建立或提升了双边战略合作（伙伴）关系。2014年，中阿贸易额突破2511亿美元，中国从阿拉伯国家进口原油1.46亿吨，成为阿拉伯国家第二大贸易伙伴。7个阿拉伯国家成为亚洲基础设施投资银行创始成员国。60年来，中国累计向阿拉伯国家提供了254亿元人民币经济援助，培训了2万多名各类人员，向8个国家派遣援外医疗队。11个阿拉伯国家成为中国公民出境旅游目的地国，中阿每周往来航班达183架次，每年往来人员达102万人次。	
China-Arab relations are now thriving. Eight Arab countries, namely Egypt, Algeria, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Sudan, Jordan and Iraq, have established or elevated to strategic cooperative relations or partnerships with China. In 2014, trade between China and Arab countries exceeded 251.1 billion U.S. dollars. China imported 146 million tons of oil from Arab countries and was the second largest trading partner for Arab countries. Seven Arab countries became founding members of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. In the past 60 years, China has provided Arab countries with a total of 25.4 billion RMB yuan in economic assistance, trained over 20,000 people in different professions and sent medical teams to eight Arab countries. Eleven Arab countries have become approved destinations for Chinese tourists. There are now 183 weekly flights between the two sides, and every year, 1.02 million people travel back and forth between China and Arab countries.
阿拉伯谚语说“独行快，众行远”，中国人常讲“朋友多了路好走”。这用来形容中阿双方结伴前行、风雨同行再恰当不过了。	
As an Arab proverb says, "he who travels alone goes fast, but he who travels in company goes far." The Chinese people say that "more friends make the journey easier". Indeed, there are no better expressions to describe China and Arab countries that have been with each other all the time and shared weal and woe all along.
当今世界正在发生深刻复杂变化，全球性挑战不断增多，世界经济复苏步履维艰，局部动荡此起彼伏，恐怖主义威胁明显上升，构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系比任何时候都更加迫切。	
The world today is undergoing profound and complex changes. Global challenges are increasing. Global economic recovery remains difficult. Regional turmoil continues to flare up and the threat of terrorism is notably on the rise. This has made it ever more urgent for a new type of international relations to be built that is geared toward win-win cooperation.
现在，中国和阿拉伯国家都处于各自发展的关键阶段。中国人民正在为全面建成小康社会、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。阿拉伯各国人民也在自主探索变革道路，努力实现民族振兴。共同的发展使命和理想追求，将中阿双方更加紧密地联系在一起。	
China and Arab countries are both at a crucial stage of development. The Chinese people are striving for the realization of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and the great renewal of the Chinese nation. The Arab people are exploring their own ways of reform and working hard for national rejuvenation. Such shared development mission and pursuit have brought us even more close to each other.
中国和阿拉伯国家国土面积之和占世界陆地总面积的六分之一，人口之和占世界总人口的四分之一，双方合作潜力巨大、前景广阔。展望未来，我们将继续致力于推进全面合作、共同发展的中阿战略合作关系，让中阿传统友谊薪火相传，让中阿合作惠及双方更多普通民众。	
Together, china and Arab countries account for one sixth of the total landmass and one fourth of the global population. This means huge potential and bright prospects for China-Arab cooperation. Looking ahead, we need to remain committed to promoting all-round cooperation and jointly developing the strategic and cooperative partnership between China and Arab countries. The two sides need to work together to pass on our traditional friendship to future generations and enable more people to benefit from our cooperation.
——中阿要做自主发展道路的实践者。世上没有包治百病的万能灵药，也没有普世皆准的发展模式。没有人比中东人民更了解中东的历史经纬，更清楚中东的何去何从。只有坚持走自己的路，路才能越走越宽、越走越长。阿拉伯人民对美好生活的向往，既是推动改革的动力，也是实现地区稳定的根本。中国愿意支持埃及等阿拉伯国家走符合自身国情的发展道路，共享发展经验，共迎时代挑战。	
China and Arab countries need to pursue independent paths of development. There is no panacea in the world, nor a universal model for development. Nobody understands the history and future of the Middle East better than the people of the region. Only by pursuing our own path can we broaden our journey and make it more durable. The aspiration of the Arab people for a better life not only provides the momentum for reform, it also lays the foundation for regional stability. China will continue to support Egypt and other Arab countries in pursuing development paths suited to their own national conditions and share development experience to jointly address the challenges of our times.
——中阿要做地区和平的捍卫者。中东不稳定，世界不太平。纵观历史，武力从来不是解决问题的良方，零和博弈、赢者通吃的逻辑同这个时代格格不入。求同存异、包容互谅才是寻求各方利益最大公约数的根本途径。中方将一如既往支持中东和平进程，支持建立以1967年边界为基础、以东耶路撒冷为首都、拥有完全主权、独立的巴勒斯坦国。中国将更多提供公共产品，同埃及等阿拉伯国家并肩维护中东地区和平稳定。	
China and Arab countries need to defend regional peace. The world could not be a tranquil place if there is instability in the Middle East. A study of history shows that force is never the right solution to problems, and the zero-sum or winner-takes-all logic is inconsistent with the call of the times. The surest way to finding the maximum common denominator between the interests of different parties is to seek consensus and be understanding and accommodative. As always, China will continue to support the Middle East peace process. China supports the establishment of an independent State of Palestine with full sovereignty based on the 1967 border and with East Jerusalem as capital. China will provide more public goods, and work with Egypt and other Arab countries to safeguard peace and stability in the Middle East.
——中阿要做互利合作的推动者。“一带一路”追求的是百花齐放的大利，不是一枝独秀的小利。中国拥有广阔市场、充裕资金、先进技术、优势产能，提出了创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念。而阿拉伯国家处于现代化进程关键阶段，普遍把工业化作为促进发展、改善民生、增加就业的重要选择。双方可以通过共建“一带一路”，把各自发展战略对接起来，深化和拓展能源、贸易投资、基础设施建设、高技术等领域合作。我们欢迎埃及和其他阿拉伯国家搭乘中国发展的便车、快车，实现双方协同发展和联动增长。	
China and Arab countries need to carry out mutually beneficial cooperation. The Belt and Road Initiative is aimed at achieving true common prosperity instead of the mere satisfaction of self-interests. China has a big market, abundant capital, advanced technology and competitive industrial capacity; it is determined to achieve innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. Arab countries are at a key stage in modernization and are focusing on achieving industrialization as a way to promote development, improve people's well-being and create more job opportunities. By jointly developing the Belt and Road Initiative, the two sides can link up our respective development strategies, deepen and expand cooperation in energy, trade and investment, infrastructure and high technology. China welcomes Egypt and other Arab countries to get on board the fast train of its development and hopes that our respective development and growth could be well aligned and mutually reinforcing.
——中阿要做文明多样性的倡导者。中华文明和阿拉伯伊斯兰文明各具特色、自成一体。我们相互欣赏、相互学习，以尊重和谦逊的态度，借鉴吸收彼此文化中的精华，为世界文明交流互鉴提供了生动范例。我们愿同埃及等阿拉伯国家一道，为传承传统文化、维护文明多样性而不懈努力。	
China and Arab countries need to advocate cultural diversity. The Chinese civilization and the Arab Islamic civilization are major civilizations of the world each with its unique features. We value and learn from each other. Such mutual learning, based on mutual respect and humility, sets a great example for exchange among different civilizations. China will work with Egypt and other Arab countries and make unremitting efforts to carry forward traditional cultures and uphold cultural diversity of our world.
古代埃及人这样赞美尼罗河：“你从大地涌出，奔流不息。”我相信，在双方共同努力下，中埃友谊、中阿友好也一定会像尼罗河水般奔涌向前，助推我们实现民族复兴的伟大梦想！	
In a hymn to the Nile, ancient Egyptians sang:" Hail to thee, O Nile, who manifests thyself over this land." I am convinced that with our joint efforts, the friendship between China and Egypt and between China and Arab countries as a whole will surge forward like the Nile and bring us to our desired destination of national renewal.
84. 习近平在塞尔维亚媒体发表署名文章《永远的朋友 真诚的伙伴》
永远的朋友 真诚的伙伴
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Enduring Friendship and True Partnership
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
应托米斯拉夫·尼科利奇总统邀请，我即将对塞尔维亚共和国进行国事访问。在这个花香四溢的季节里到访美丽而充满传奇故事的友邦，令我倍感亲切。我期待着同尼科利奇总统以及塞尔维亚其他领导人畅叙友情、共谋合作、展望未来，把中塞战略伙伴关系推向新高度。	
I will be paying a state visit to the Republic of Serbia at the invitation of President Tomislav Nikolic. I am delighted to visit this friendly, beautiful and legendary country in the season of blooming flowers. I look forward to renewing friendship and exploring future cooperation with President Nikolic and other Serbian leaders with a view to taking the strategic partnership between our two countries to a new high.
塞尔维亚是中东欧和巴尔干地区重要国家，拥有悠久历史和灿烂文化。千百年来，东西方文明在这里交融碰撞，激荡出人类文明发展的重要成果。在这一过程中，勤劳勇敢的塞尔维亚人民谱写了争取民族独立自由的英雄史诗和追求美好幸福生活的壮丽篇章。	
With a long history and a splendid culture, Serbia is an important country in Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) in general and the Balkans in particular. For centuries, Serbia has been a place where civilizations of the East and West meet, interact and together bring about major progress in human civilization. It is also on this land that the hard-working and brave Serbian people have left a heroic epic in their fight for national independence and freedom and written an inspiring chapter in pursuit of a happier life.
上世纪40年代，中国人民同南斯拉夫人民在东西方战场英勇抗击法西斯侵略，实现了民族解放和自由。50年代初，中国同南斯拉夫联邦人民共和国正式建交，掀开了中国人民同塞尔维亚人民友谊合作新的一页。中国古代思想家孟子说：“友也者，友其德也。”60多年来，两国人民始终心手相连，彼此怀有特殊感情，跨越时空的真情厚谊历久弥新。	
In the 1940s, the Chinese and the Yugoslavians fought gallantly against Fascist aggression on the Eastern and Western fronts and went on to achieve national liberation and freedom. In the early 1950s, China and the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia established diplomatic relations, opening a new chapter of friendship and cooperation between the Chinese people and the Serbian people. The ancient Chinese philosopher Mencius said, one should befriend those with virtues. Over the past six decades and more, the profound friendship and special bond between our peoples have defied the passage of time and the long distance between us to become even stronger.
塞尔维亚有句俗语：“朋友是时间的果实。”我们不会忘记，《瓦尔特保卫萨拉热窝》、《桥》等著名影片曾经激发无数中国人的爱国热情，《啊，朋友再见》这首歌曲至今仍然在中国传唱。上世纪80年代，在中国实行改革开放政策的关键时期，塞尔维亚人民的成功实践和经验，为中国提供了宝贵借鉴。	
A Serbian proverb goes, "Prijatelj je plod vremena" (friends are the fruits of time). We will never forget this: Famous movies like Walter Defends Sarajevo and Bridge once inspired the patriotic ardor of many Chinese, and to this day, Bella ciao is still widely heard in China; and in the 1980s, when China was in a crucial period of reform and opening-up, the successful experience of the Serbian people served as valuable reference for China.
我们也不会忘记，2008年中国汶川发生特大地震灾害后，塞尔维亚第一时间向中国伸出援手，无私向灾区人民提供了大量救灾物资。2015年9月，尼科利奇总统赴北京出席中国人民抗日战争暨世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年纪念活动，更是发出了中塞两国携手维护战后国际秩序、捍卫世界和平、共建人类美好未来的最强音。	
Neither will we forget this: When the Chinese county of Wenchuan was hit by a massive earthquake in 2008, Serbia offered speedy assistance to China and provided a large amount of relief supplies to the people in the affected areas; and in September 2015, President Nikolic went to Beijing for the commemorative events marking the 70th anniversary of the victory of the Chinese People's War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression and the World Anti-Fascist War, sending a strong message of our two countries' commitment to upholding the post-war international order, safeguarding world peace and building a better future for mankind.
我们更不会忘记，互尊互信、相互支持、合作共赢是中塞关系的真实写照。无论国际形势如何风云变幻、中塞两国各自如何发展变革，双方始终充分理解和尊重彼此选择的道路，坚定支持彼此核心利益和重大关切，致力于深化彼此政治互信和互利合作。	
We will never forget that China-Serbia relations have been defined by mutual respect, mutual trust, mutual support and win-win cooperation. No matter how the international situation changes and how our countries develop and transform, we have always shown full understanding and respect for each other's choices of development path, given each other firm support on issues concerning core interests and major concerns, and remained committed to deepening our political trust and mutually beneficial cooperation.
当前，中塞传统友谊正在日益焕发出新的生机，两国关系的深度、广度不断提升。近年来，我同尼科利奇总统多次会晤，就巩固传统友谊、深化政治互信、推进互利合作达成重要共识。2009年，中塞建立战略伙伴关系，塞尔维亚成为第一个同中国建立战略伙伴关系的中东欧国家。2013年，我同尼科利奇总统一道签署《中塞关于深化战略伙伴关系的联合声明》，两国关系的战略重要性更加突出。	
Today, our traditional friendship has gained fresh vitality, and the bilateral ties have grown in breadth and depth. In recent years, President Nikolic and I had a number of meetings and reached important agreement on consolidating traditional friendship, deepening political trust and advancing mutually beneficial cooperation. In 2009, our two countries established a strategic partnership, the first of its kind between a CEE country and China. In 2013, President Nikolic and I signed a joint statement on deepening China-Serbia strategic partnership, further enhancing the strategic significance of our relations.
在双边关系、“一带一路”倡议、“16+1合作”等框架内，两国务实合作不断取得新突破，成果在中东欧地区最为突出。双方签署共同推进“一带一路”建设谅解备忘录。匈塞铁路、贝尔格莱德跨多瑙河大桥、E763高速公路、科斯托拉茨电站改扩建、河北钢铁集团收购塞尔维亚斯梅代雷沃钢厂等一批重大项目先后落地，形成了两国大项目合作整体推进的喜人局面，取得了良好经济社会效益，在中东欧地区产生了积极影响。	
Both bilaterally and within the frameworks of the Belt and Road Initiative (the Initiative of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road) and China-CEEC cooperation, practical cooperation between our two countries is making breakthroughs and yielding more results than in other parts of Central and Eastern Europe. We have signed an MOU on jointly developing the Belt and Road. With the implementation of such major projects as the Belgrade-Budapest Railway, the Mihajlo Pupin Bridge, the E763 Motorway, the expansion and upgrading of Kostolac Power Plant, and the acquisition of the Smederevo steel mill by Hebei Iron and Steel Group, our cooperation on major projects is making heartening and sweeping progress, delivering economic and social benefits and a positive impact on the entire Central and Eastern European region.
两国人文交流日趋密切，文化、教育、科技等各领域合作良好，党际、地方交流频繁。双方签署了《关于互设文化中心的协议》，贝尔格莱德、诺维萨德大学已经开设孔子学院，塞尔维亚已经在全国100多所中小学启动汉语教学试点工作，贝尔格莱德中国文化中心即将启动建设，将为中塞两国人民心灵相通打开新渠道。	
There are closer exchanges between our peoples, sound cooperation in culture, education and science and technology, and regular inter-party and sub-national interactions. We have signed an agreement on setting up culture centers in each other's countries; the University of Belgrade and the University of Novi Sad have opened Confucius Institutes; the Chinese language is now taught on a pilot basis in more than 100 middle and primary schools in Serbia; and construction will soon start for the China Culture Center in Belgrade. All these represent new avenues of communication between our peoples.
塞尔维亚人讲：“先跨越，再言语”，中国人常说“行胜于言”。中国高度重视发展同塞尔维亚的关系，珍视两国深厚的传统友谊，愿深入挖掘互利合作潜力，实现优势互补，推动两国关系行稳致远。我这次访问塞尔维亚，就是希望同塞方一道，通过深入交流和广泛协商，用实实在在的行动，把中塞两国和两国人民更加紧密联系在一起，做永远的朋友、真诚的伙伴。	
The Serbian people believe that "prvo skoci, pa reci hop" (walk the walk, then talk the talk) while the Chinese people believe that actions speak louder than words. China attaches great importance to its relations with Serbia and values the profound tradition of China-Serbia friendship. China is ready to tap the potential of win-win cooperation by utilizing our complementarity so as to achieve steady and sustained growth of our relations. The purpose of my upcoming visit to Serbia is to engage deeply and extensively with our Serbian friends to explore concrete actions that can bring our countries and peoples closer together and ensure a lasting friendship and true partnership.
——我们要始终着眼长远，坚持相互尊重、相互信任、相互理解。双方要继续在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切的问题上给予对方坚定支持，不断提升两国关系的战略性和全面性。中国尊重塞尔维亚人民自己选择的发展道路，尊重塞尔维亚主权和领土完整，理解塞尔维亚致力于加入欧盟的努力。	
-- We need to focus on the long term and always respect, trust and understand each other. We should firmly support each other on issues concerning our core interests and major concerns and work for a more strategic and comprehensive relationship. China respects the Serbian people's independent choice of development path as well as Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity, and understands Serbia's efforts toward EU membership.
——我们要始终坚持互利共赢、携手共进、共同发展。中国愿同塞尔维亚分享发展成果和机遇，探索和加强双方发展战略对接，扩大利益融合，重点在“一带一路”、“16+1合作”等框架内扩大贸易和投资规模，不断挖掘合作潜力，打造更多大项目合作，使中塞合作成为“16+1合作”的标杆和典范，切实造福两国人民。	
-- We need to stay committed to pursuing win-win results and common development. China will share its development fruits and opportunities with Serbia, and work with Serbia to explore and strengthen alignment of our respective development strategies in a bid to expand converging interests, scale up trade and investment, especially in context of the Belt and Road Initiative and China-CEEC cooperation, further tap cooperation potential and facilitate greater cooperation on major projects in order to make China-Serbia cooperation a shining example for China-CEEC cooperation and bring real benefits to our two peoples.
——我们要始终致力于夯实两国关系民意基础。双方应该充分发掘和利用两国传统友谊宝藏，开辟新渠道、拓展新方式，加强在教育、文化、旅游等各领域交流合作，使中塞友谊薪火相传。	
-- We need to further cement popular support for the bilateral relations. It is important for us to make the most of the reservoir of traditional friendship and find new ways and means to increase exchanges and cooperation in education, culture and tourism so that this friendship will be passed on from generation to generation.
——我们要始终在国际事务中保持密切沟通和协作。双方应该在联合国等国际组织和机构中相互配合，在重大国际和地区问题上重视和照顾彼此关切。中方期待同塞方一道，为维护地区稳定和世界和平，促进人类共同发展繁荣作出应有贡献。	
-- We need to maintain close communication and coordination in international affairs. Our two sides should work in concert at the UN and other international organizations and institutions and take care of each other's concerns on major international and regional issues. China looks forward to working with Serbia to make due contribution to regional stability, world peace and the common development and prosperity of mankind.
我相信，在双方一道努力下，中塞两国战略伙伴之路必将越走越宽。	
I am fully convinced that with our joint efforts, the strategic partnership between China and Serbia will grow from strength to strength.
77. 习近平在孟加拉国媒体发表署名文章《让中孟合作收获金色果实》
让中孟合作收获金色果实
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
China-Bangladesh Cooperation Will Bear Golden Fruits
By H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
金秋时节，稻谷飘香。我应哈米德总统邀请，将对美丽的孟加拉国进行国事访问。这是我时隔6年再次来访。我期待着同新老朋友们共叙友谊、共谋发展，共绘合作蓝图。	
At the kind invitation of President Abdul Hamid, I will pay a state visit to the beautiful country of Bangladesh in this golden harvest season of autumn. It has been six years since my last trip to this country and I look forward to meeting friends both old and new and discussing with them how China and Bangladesh can work together for common development.
孟加拉国是一片神奇瑰丽的热土。在这里，帕德玛河、贾木纳河、梅格纳河三条大河奔流入海，千里沃野一望无疆，平日里如碧绿的翡翠，丰收时着金色的盛装。得天独厚的自然条件，养育了勤劳智慧的人民，孕育了悠久灿烂的文化，著名文豪泰戈尔用孟加拉语创作的作品享誉世界。	
Bangladesh is a fascinating and promising land. It is where the Padma, Jamuna and Meghna rivers flow into the sea. Its vast expanse of fertile fields which normally have the color of emerald green become a sea of golden yellow at the time of harvest. Endowed with rich natural resources, this land is home to a hard-working and talented nation and a time-honored and splendid culture. In fact, famous poet Rabindranath Tagore wrote many of his most notable works in Bengali.
孟加拉国是一片充满希望的热土。在这里，独立后的孟加拉国白手起家，艰苦奋斗，成功解决了1.6亿人口的生计问题，为世界减贫事业作出了重要贡献。近年来，孟加拉国抓住经济全球化机遇，聚焦改革和发展，经济保持6%以上增长，工业化和城市化进程不断推进，正朝着成为中等收入国家的“2021愿景”迈进。	
Bangladesh is a land filled with hope. Since its independence, Bangladesh has come a long way. With strenuous efforts, it has started from scratch and successfully met the livelihood needs of its 160 million population, contributing significantly to global poverty reduction. In recent years, by seizing the opportunities of economic globalization and focusing on reform and development, Bangladesh has kept its economy growing at above 6 percent and made steady progress in industrialization and urbanization. Bangladesh is well on track to achieve Vision 2021 and become a middle-income country.
中孟两国人民自古以来就是好邻居、好朋友，古代南方丝绸之路、海上丝绸之路成为双方相知相交的纽带，留下不少千年传诵的佳话。中国高僧法显、玄奘西行取经，孟加拉高僧阿底峡尊者赴华传教，为双方文化交流开启了先河。明代航海家郑和两度到访孟加拉地区，形容这里“民俗淳善，物穰民稠，田沃丰足”。孟加拉国王赠送给中国明代皇帝的长颈鹿成为轰动中国的“麒麟”瑞兽。	
The people of China and Bangladesh have been good neighbors and friends since ancient times. Stories of our friendship and exchange witnessed by the Southern Silk Road and the Maritime Silk Road throughout the millennia are still being told today. Eminent Chinese monks Faxian and Xuanzang travelled west for Buddhist scriptures. Atisa Dipankara Shrijnana, a Bengali religious master, spread Buddhism in China. They were the pioneers of our cultural exchange. Famous navigator Zheng He of the Ming Dynasty visited Bengal twice. According to his description, "This is a richly endowed and teeming land with lovely people and fertile fields." Believed by the Chinese then to be a qilin (an auspicious mythical animal), the giraffe that the Bengali king gave to the Ming emperor brought much excitement to the court and general public in China.
近代以来，中孟两国人民饱受战争和国家贫弱之苦，为争取民族独立和解放、促进国家发展和进步而不懈努力，铸就了牢固的友谊和信任。上世纪五六十年代，周恩来总理两次到访达卡，孟加拉国国父穆吉布·拉赫曼两次访华。早在建交之前，两国老一辈领导人就为中孟两国人民种下了友谊之树。如今这棵大树根深叶茂，硕果累累。	
More recently, having endured repeated wars and incessant poverty, our peoples fought tenaciously for national independence and liberation, strove for development and progress and forged unshakable trust and friendship in the process. In the 1950s and 1960s, Premier Zhou Enlai visited Dhaka twice and Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman visited China twice. The seed of friendship was thus planted by the veteran leaders of our two countries long before diplomatic ties were established. It has now grown into a giant tree with deep roots and rich fruits.
中国人讲，“唯以心相交，方能成其久远”。建交41年来，中国始终视孟加拉国为真挚的朋友、发展的伙伴，高度重视中孟关系发展，同孟方在涉及彼此核心利益的问题上相互坚定支持。中孟历任领导人在双边和多边场合保持良好互动，积极引领两国关系发展。去年9月，我同哈西娜总理在纽约出席联合国成立70周年系列峰会期间举行了友好会晤，双方一致同意全面拓展各领域合作，共同推进“一带一路”和孟中印缅经济走廊建设，推动两国关系早日迈上新台阶。	
As a Chinese proverb goes, "Only friendships built on sincerity can last long." Since the establishment of diplomatic ties 41 years ago, China has always regarded Bangladesh as its true friend and partner for development. China highly values its relations with Bangladesh. We firmly support each other on issues concerning each other's core interests. Successive Chinese and Bangladeshi leaders have maintained sound interactions at bilateral and multilateral events and provided positive guidance to the growth of bilateral relations. In September 2015, I had a good meeting with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in New York on the margins of the UN summits marking its 70th anniversary. We agreed to expand cooperation across the board, jointly advance the Belt and Road Initiative and the BCIM Economic Corridor and take bilateral relations to a new height.
在两国人民辛勤耕耘下，中孟务实合作喜获丰收。当前，中国已经成为孟加拉国最大贸易伙伴，孟加拉国是中国在南亚第三大贸易伙伴和第三大工程承包市场。中孟双边贸易额从2000年的9亿美元迅速增长到2015年的147亿美元，年均增幅20%左右。孟加拉国的黄麻产品在中国市场越来越受欢迎。中国企业为孟加拉国建设了最先进的现代化大型化肥厂——沙迦拉化肥厂，最大的国际会展中心——邦戈班杜国际会议中心，正在承建孟加拉国人民的“梦想之桥”——帕德玛大桥。在交通、电力、能源、通信等领域，都有中国企业同孟加拉国广大建设者一道同甘共苦、勤勉开拓的身影。中方发起的亚洲基础设施投资银行首批贷款项目就包括孟加拉国配电系统升级改造项目，孟加拉国上千万农村人口将因此受益。此外，两国在防务安全、教育文化等领域合作也取得了长足进展。	
With the unremitting efforts of our two peoples, China-Bangladesh practical cooperation has produced fruitful results. China is now the largest trading partner of Bangladesh and Bangladesh China's third largest trading partner and third largest project contract market in South Asia. Bilateral trade soared from 900 million U.S. dollars in 2000 to 14.7 billion U.S. dollars in 2015, registering an annual increase of around 20 percent. Jute products from Bangladesh are increasingly popular in the Chinese market. Chinese companies have built the Shahjalal Fertilizer Factory, the most advanced modern fertilizer plant in Bangladesh, the Bangabandhu International Conference Center, the largest one in Bangladesh, and are now building the Padma Bridge, the dream bridge of the Bangladeshi people. As a matter of fact, one can find Chinese and Bangladeshi people together making tireless and pioneering efforts in many sectors of Bangladesh such as transportation, electricity, energy and telecommunications. One of the first batch of projects financed by loans from the China-initiated Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank is the Power Grid Network Strengthening Project in Bangladesh, which will benefit tens of millions of rural residents. We have also made significant progress in our cooperation in defense, security, education, culture and other fields.
中国和孟加拉国同为人口大国和发展中国家，国情民情相似，发展目标契合。“金色孟加拉”梦想所展现的孟加拉国人民强国富民之梦，同中国人民追求中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦相通相融。中国提出的“一带一路”倡议为两国合作共赢提供了新的机遇。无论就地理位置、人口规模而言，还是从市场潜力、合作空间来看，孟加拉国都是中国在南亚和印度洋地区开展“一带一路”建设和产能合作不可或缺的重要伙伴。	
Both China and Bangladesh are developing countries with a huge population. Our national conditions have a lot in common and our development goals are well-aligned. The "Sonar Bangla" dream of national strength and prosperity is in perfect harmony with the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The Belt and Road Initiative put forward by China heralds new opportunities for win-win cooperation between our two countries. Bangladesh, with its favorable geographic location and huge population, market potential and cooperation space, is an indispensable partner for China to advance the Belt and Road Initiative and production capacity cooperation in South Asia and the Indian Ocean region.
我期待通过这次访问，同孟方领导人一道，提高双边关系水平，确定两国重点合作方向，推进中孟各领域交流合作，将中孟关系推向新的高度。	
During this visit, I look forward to working with Bangladeshi leaders to further grow our bilateral relations, identify key areas of cooperation, advance exchanges and cooperation in various fields and bring China-Bangladesh relations to a new level.
——我们要加强政治沟通，收获真诚互信的果实。孟加拉国国父穆吉布·拉赫曼曾经发出“友及天下，不树一敌”的心愿。中国永远是孟加拉国可以信赖的朋友和伙伴。双方应该从战略高度出发，加强高层交往和顶层设计，增进传统友谊，巩固政治关系，为双边关系确定更高远的目标、搭建更完善的框架，为两国世代友好和全面合作深入发展打下坚实基础。	
-- We need to step up political communication for greater mutual trust. Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman put forward the vision of "friendship to all, malice to none." China will always be Bangladesh's trustworthy friend and partner. Our two sides should, from a strategic perspective, strengthen high-level exchanges and top-level planning, cement traditional friendship and political ties, set more ambitious goals and build a better framework for our bilateral relations and lay a solid foundation for lasting friendship and all-round cooperation.
——我们要对接发展战略，收获互利共赢的果实。中孟合作互补性强，潜力巨大。我们愿将中国“十三五”规划同孟加拉国“七五”计划紧密结合，发挥各自比较优势，扩大经贸往来，在基础设施建设、产能合作、能源电力、交通运输、信息通信、农业等领域打造重点项目，在孟中印缅经济走廊框架内加强双方务实合作，使两国民众切实享受到中孟合作带来的福祉。	
-- We need to align our development strategies for win-win outcomes. There is huge potential and complementarity in our cooperation. China is ready to synergize its 13th Five-Year Plan with Bangladesh's Seventh Five-Year Plan with a view to leveraging our respective comparative advantages, increasing economic exchanges and trade, building key projects in areas such as infrastructure, production capacity, energy, electricity, transportation, information, telecommunications and agriculture, strengthening practical cooperation under the BCIM Economic Corridor and delivering to our people tangible benefits of our cooperation.
——我们要加强南南合作，收获共同发展的果实。中方愿继续在力所能及的范围内为孟方提供更多支持和帮助，在防灾减灾、职业培训、医疗卫生、应对气候变化、妇女儿童等领域同孟方加强互助合作，共同落实2030年可持续发展议程，将中孟合作打造成南南合作的新样板。	
-- We need to enhance South-South cooperation for common development. China stands ready to offer more assistance and support to Bangladesh to the best of its capability, enhance mutual assistance and cooperation with Bangladesh in areas such as disaster prevention and mitigation, vocational training, medical and health care services, climate change and women and children, work together with Bangladesh to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and make China-Bangladesh cooperation a fine example of South-South cooperation.
——我们要架设友谊之桥，收获相知相亲的果实。中孟两国人民同饮雅鲁藏布江－贾木纳河之水，两国友好源远流长。中国愿推动中华文化和孟加拉文化彼此交融、互学互鉴，在两国人民心中架起心灵相通的桥梁。我们应该推动教育、媒体、智库、旅游、青年、地方等领域交流合作百花齐放，让更多民众成为中孟友好事业支持者。	
-- We need to build a bridge of friendship for greater affinity and mutual understanding. Friendship between our two countries dates back a long time. In fact, both the Chinese and Bangladeshi people drink water from the same river, known as Yarlung Zangbo River in China and Jamuna River in Bangladesh. China will work to increase exchanges and mutual learning between the Chinese and Bangladeshi culture so as to bring our people closer to each other. It is important that we facilitate exchanges and cooperation in areas such as education, media, think tanks, tourism and youth and at the sub-national level so that more of our people will be mobilized to support closer ties between China and Bangladesh.
我相信，只要中孟两国人民共同努力，中孟合作必将收获更加丰硕的金色果实！	
I believe with the joint efforts of our two peoples, China-Bangladesh cooperation will bear even more golden fruits.
88. 习近平在捷克媒体发表署名文章《奏响中捷关系的时代强音》
奏响中捷关系的时代强音
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Time to Renew and Energize China-Czech Ties
For the Pravo by Chinese President Xi Jinping
应泽曼总统邀请，我将对捷克共和国进行国事访问。这是我担任中国国家主席后首次访问捷克。我期待同泽曼总统和捷克其他领导人就新形势下提高中捷关系发展水平以及重大国际和地区问题深入交换意见。	
At the invitation of President Milos Zeman, I will be paying my first state visit to the Czech Republic as the Chinese President. I look forward to having in-depth exchange of views with President Zeman and other Czech leaders on boosting bilateral ties and on major international and regional issues.
捷克人杰地灵，山川秀美，人文历史底蕴深厚。上世纪90年代，我曾经到访捷克，勤劳智慧的捷克人民、蓬勃开展的捷克经济社会建设、伏尔塔瓦河孕育的波西米亚文明都给我留下了深刻印象。	
The Czech Republic is known for picturesque landscape, rich cultural heritage and talented people. I visited this country in the 1990s and was deeply impressed by the hard work and ingenuity of the Czech people, dynamic economic and social progress and the Bohemian culture nourished by the Vltava river.
捷克是最早承认并同新中国建交的国家之一。建交67年来，中捷两国和两国人民传统友谊不断加深。上世纪50年代，捷克著名画家斯克莱纳尔到访中国，同吴作人、齐白石等中国美术大师结下友好情谊。斯克莱纳尔回到捷克后创作了许多《美猴王》画作，被称作孙悟空的第七十三种变化。《鼹鼠的故事》是最早进入中国的动画片。小鼹鼠憨态可掬、善良勇敢的卡通形象深受中国广大少年儿童喜爱。音乐大师斯美塔那创作的交响诗套曲《我的祖国》和文学家哈谢克的著作《好兵帅克》在中国广为人知。	
The Czech Republic is one of the first countries to recognize and establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. Since the establishment of diplomatic ties 67 years ago, the traditional friendship between our countries and peoples has gone from strength to strength. In the 1950s, a well-known Czech painter Zdenek Sklenar came to China and became good friends with Wu Zuoren, Qi Baishi and other renowned Chinese painters. After returning to his country, Zdenek Sklenar drew many illustrations of Monkey King, regarded fondly as a unique variation of the image of this popular character. Krtek is the first foreign cartoon series introduced to China. The chubby, kind-hearted and courageous little mole became immensely popular among China's young audience. Bedrich Smetana's symphonic cycle Ma Vlast and Jaroslav Hasek's The Good Soldier Svejk are also familiar masterpieces to the Chinese public.
近年来，中捷关系发展驶入快车道。两年内，我同泽曼总统4度会面，就加强两国高层交往、深化战略互信、提升各领域交流合作水平达成广泛共识。2015年年底，双方签署关于共同推进“一带一路”建设的政府间谅解备忘录，为两国各领域交流合作开辟了更加广阔的空间。	
In recent years, China-Czech relations entered a period of fast growth. In a short span of two years, President Zeman and I met four times and reached broad common understanding on strengthening high-level exchanges, deepening strategic mutual trust and intensifying exchanges and cooperation across the board. At the end of 2015, the two governments signed an MOU on jointly promoting the "Belt and Road" initiative, which created even wider prospects for bilateral exchanges and cooperation in all fields.
中国连续多年是捷克在欧盟外第一大贸易伙伴，捷克是中国在中东欧地区第二大贸易伙伴。2015年，中捷双边贸易额达到110亿美元。中捷核电、金融、航空、科技、农业等领域合作日新月异，合作水平和规模不断提升。两国多家企业到对方国家投资兴业，业务发展迅速。	
For many years in a row, China has been the Czech Republic's largest trading partner outside the European Union and the Czech Republic China's second largest trading partner in Central and Eastern Europe. In 2015, our bilateral trade topped 11 billion U.S. dollars. Our cooperation in nuclear power, finance, aviation, science and technology and agriculture scaled new heights both in level and scale. Many Chinese and Czech companies have investments and booming business operations in each other's countries.
中捷人文交流活力迸发。捷克已经成为中国游客憧憬和向往的旅游目的地。2015年，来捷克旅游的中国游客总数突破30万人次，创历史新高。旅游合作已经成为中捷交流合作的一张亮丽“名片”。中东欧首家中医中心在捷克落户。中捷影视合作方兴未艾。中国将举办2022年冬奥会，为双方加强体育交流提供了良好机遇。	
Our people-to-people and cultural exchanges are flourishing. The Czech Republic is an attractive destination to Chinese tourists, who made a record number of more than 300,000 visits here in 2015, making tourism a bright spot in China-Czech cooperation. Today, the Czech Republic hosts the first traditional Chinese medicine research center in Central and Eastern Europe. Cooperation on film and TV production is gaining momentum. The 2022 Winter Olympics to be held in China also offers a great opportunity for sports exchanges between our two countries.
这次访问也是我担任国家主席后第一次访问中东欧国家。中国同中东欧国家有着源远流长的深厚友谊。得益于双方的强烈政治意愿和良好的民意基础，中国－中东欧国家合作（“16+1合作”）应运而生，方兴未艾。4年来，中国同中东欧国家一道，本着相互尊重、互利共赢、包容开放的原则，建机制、搭平台、促合作，共同推动“16+1合作”逐渐步入成熟期和早期收获期。中国同中东欧国家开展共建“一带一路”合作以及中欧不断加强战略对接，为“16+1合作”汇聚了更为蓬勃的动力，开辟了更为广阔的空间。	
This visit also marks my first trip to a Central and Eastern European country (CEEC) as China's president. With our deep-rooted friendship, political good-will and popular support as a strong basis, China and CEECs launched "16+1" cooperation, which has since made solid progress. Over the past four years, under the principles of mutual respect, mutual benefit, inclusiveness and openness, China and CEECs have built new cooperation mechanisms and platforms. Thanks to these efforts, China-CEECs cooperation is entering a maturing phase and delivering early harvests. Our cooperation on the "Belt and Road" initiative and efforts to strengthen synergy between China and the EU in their development strategies will create even greater impetus and potential for "16+1" cooperation.
欧盟是中国的全面战略伙伴。2014年3月，我访问欧盟总部期间，同欧方领导人一道决定打造中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系，为新时期中欧关系指明了战略方向。2015年中欧建交40周年之际，双方决定推进“一带一路”倡议同欧洲投资计划等发展战略对接，组建中欧共同投资基金、互联互通平台等，进一步确立了中欧务实合作的新框架。中欧关系正处于历史发展最好时期，面临前所未有的历史机遇。	
The EU is China's comprehensive strategic partner. In March 2014, during my visit to the EU headquarters, the EU leaders and I agreed to develop partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization, pointing the strategic direction for China-EU relations. Last year, marking the 40th anniversary of diplomatic ties, the two sides decided to promote synergy between the "Belt and Road" initiative and the Investment Plan for Europe and set up the China-EU co-investment vehicle and the Connectivity Platform, broadening the new framework of China-EU practical cooperation. China-EU relations are at their best period in history and are presented with unprecedented historic opportunities of further growth.
当前，中欧双方都在推进结构性改革，激发经济社会发展活力。中国人民正在为全面建成小康社会、实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。不久前颁布实施的中国国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划纲要，贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，致力于稳增长、转方式、调结构，努力在未来5年保持经济中高速增长。欧盟正致力于保持经济复苏势头，大力提升欧盟经济发展竞争力。在此背景下，中欧双方发展战略契合度高、合作潜力巨大、前景广阔。中国愿同欧盟一道，发扬同舟共济、合作共赢的精神，共同为世界经济发展贡献力量。	
China and the EU are both deepening structural reforms to unleash greater social and economic vitality. People in China are now striving to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, advance towards the "two centenary goals" of development (i.e. to double 2010 GDP and per capita income and finish the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the time the CPC celebrates its centenary in 2021 and to turn the PRC into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious by the time it celebrates its centenary in 2049) and realize the Chinese dream of national rejuvenation. The Outline of the 13th Five-Year Plan for Social and Economic Development, which was recently promulgated, calls for innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development and sets forth the targets of maintaining stable growth, upgrading the growth model and economic structure, aiming at a medium-to-high growth speed for the coming five years. The EU is working to keep the momentum of economic recovery and boost its economic competitiveness. Such a high complementarity in our development strategies and great potential of our cooperation hold out great promise for the future of China-EU relations. China will join hands with the EU for win-win cooperation, and together contribute to world economic development.
中国－中东欧国家合作和中欧关系的发展需要依靠双边关系的有力支撑。当前，中捷两国面临着双边关系发展的重要历史机遇。我期待通过这次访问，同捷克领导人一道，提高双边关系水平，推动“16+1合作”以及中欧关系不断向前发展。	
China-CEECs cooperation and China-EU relations need to be underpinned by strong bilateral relationships. This is an opportune time for the development of China-Czech relations. I look forward to working with Czech leaders to further enhance bilateral relations and push for new progress in "16+1" cooperation and China-EU relations.
——加强政治互信，指明发展方向。“求木之长者，必固其根本。”中捷双方应该适时提高双边关系定位，坚持从战略高度和长远角度看待双边关系，本着互相尊重、平等相待的原则，坚定支持对方的核心利益和重大关切，确保中捷关系长期健康稳定发展，牢牢把握两国关系发展的大方向。	
-- We should enhance political mutual trust and establish a clear direction for the development of our ties. As people say in China, a tree can grow tall only when its roots are strong. China and the Czech Republic should consider upgrading the bilateral relationship in due time, adopt a strategic and long-term perspective, follow the principle of mutual respect and equality, and render firm support to each other on issues concerning our core interests and major concerns, to ensure long-term sound and stable development of bilateral ties and set the right direction for our relations.
——加强战略对接，释放合作潜力。中捷双方应该以签署共同推进“一带一路”建设政府间谅解备忘录为重要契机，加强各自发展战略和愿景的对接，进一步梳理和筹备重大合作项目，争取早期收获。	
-- We should better align our development strategies to tap the potential of cooperation. The MOU of cooperation on the joint development of the "Belt and Road" between China and the Czech Republic offers fresh opportunity for the two countries to better align our development strategies and plans, and prepare the ground for identifying major cooperation projects for early harvest.
——加强经贸合作，惠及两国民众。经过30多年的改革开放，中国在资金、技术、装备方面已经形成较大优势，特别是在铁路、核电建设等领域优势明显。捷克位于欧洲心脏地带，地理位置优越，工业基础雄厚，在机械加工、汽车制造、航空等领域具有独特优势。中方愿同捷方一道，以制造业为基础推进产能合作，带动金融、通信、智能工业、纳米、环保等各领域务实合作，让两国民众分享更多互利合作成果。	
-- We should enhance economic cooperation for the benefit of our people. More than 30 years of reform and opening-up has sharpened China's competitive edge in terms of capital, technology and equipment, especially in railway and nuclear plant construction. Situated in the heartland of Europe, the Czech Republic enjoys advantageous location, strong industrial foundation and unique strengths in machining, automobile manufacturing and aero-industry. China hopes to cooperate with the Czech side to carry out industrial capacity cooperation in the manufacturing sector, and on that basis, expand practical cooperation in such areas as finance, telecommunications, smart industry, nano technology and environmental protection, to deliver greater fruits of this mutually beneficial cooperation to our two peoples.
——加强人文交流，赋予时代内涵。中捷两国人民素来互相欣赏对方的文明、文化，近年来更是不断掀起交流高潮。我们要继续扩大文化、教育、影视、旅游、卫生等领域人文交流，鼓励青年和学生交往，让两国人民的传统友谊世代相传、历久弥新。	
-- We should encourage people-to-people and cultural exchanges. The Chinese and Czech peoples have long admired and appreciated each other's civilization and culture, and such exchanges have boomed in recent years. We should expand exchanges in culture, education, film and television, tourism and health sectors, encourage young people and students to interact more with each other to renew our traditional friendship.
——加强区域合作，用好广阔平台。捷克一直积极支持和参与中国－中东欧国家合作，在卫生、地方合作等方面一直走在中东欧国家前列，在“16+1合作”中发挥了积极重要作用。我们愿同包括捷克在内的中东欧国家一道，为做大做强“16+1合作”共同努力。	
-- We should step up regional cooperation by bringing into play the role of multilateral platforms. The Czech Republic has actively supported and participated in China-CEECs cooperation, demonstrating its important role by spearheading health cooperation and cooperation at sub-national levels. We hope to work together with the Czech Republic and other CEECs to make the "16+1" a premier framework for regional cooperation.
——加强中欧合作，共建美好未来。中欧双方应当顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，不断深化各自发展战略对接，加强在国际舞台上的沟通和协调，携手努力，推动中欧全面战略伙伴关系不断迈上新台阶。	
-- We should strengthen China-EU cooperation for a better future. China and the EU should follow the trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation, further synergize development strategies, enhance communication and coordination in the international arena and work for new progress of the China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership.
让我们齐心协力，奏响中捷关系时代强音，共同创造中国－中东欧国家合作以及中欧关系更加美好的明天。	
Let us work together to renew and energize the development of China-Czech ties and usher in a bright new era of China-CEECs cooperation and China-EU relations.
74. 习近平在智利媒体发表署名文章《共同开创中国和智利关系更加美好的未来》
共同开创中国和智利关系更加美好的未来 　　
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together for a More Promising Future of China-Chile Relations
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
智利被誉为“天涯之国”，依山傍海，风光壮美，物产富饶，文化灿烂。智利人民勤劳智慧，依靠自己的双手，发扬坚韧不拔的民族精神，创造了发展奇迹。	
Chile, known as "the land where the earth ends," is situated between the sea and mountains and boasts beautiful landscape, rich resources and splendid culture. The industrious and ingenious people of Chile, with their strengths and perseverance, have created a development miracle.
5年前，我到访智利，留下美好印象。今天，再次踏上这片美丽的土地，备感亲切，充满期待。	
Five years ago, I visited Chile and was deeply impressed by the country. Today, as I set foot on this beautiful land again, I feel very much at home and begin my visit with great expectations.
中智分处地球两端，相距遥远，但两国人民交往源远流长，结下了不解之缘。诺贝尔文学奖获得者、智利大诗人聂鲁达亲切地把中国称为“伟大的兄弟”。中国（China）和智利（Chile）不仅有着兄弟般的国名，两国人民还拥有兄弟般的友情。	
China and Chile are far away from each other, but the two peoples enjoy a long history of interactions and profound friendship. Pablo Neruda, a Nobel Prize laureate in literature and a major poet in Chile, referred to China affectionately as a "great brother." Even the names of our two countries, China and Chile, resemble those of two brothers and our two peoples have indeed fostered a brotherly relationship.
中智两国人民素有相知相亲的传统。两国人民隔海相望，彼此欣赏。聂鲁达多次访华，写下了《中国大地之歌》、《亚细亚之风》等歌颂和祝福中国的诗篇。他的作品在中国广为传颂，影响了许多中国诗人。智利著名画家万徒勒里旅居中国多年，他借鉴中国水墨丹青技法，创作了《长江》等作品，饱含着对中国的深深眷恋。这些诗歌和画作凝聚着中智两国人民深情厚谊。他们成立了拉美第一家民间对华友好组织——智中文化协会，带动一批批有识之士投身中智友好事业。在圣地亚哥有一所“长江小学”，寓意中智友谊如同长江一样，后浪推前浪。	
The two peoples have the tradition of mutual understanding and affection. Though our two peoples are separated by the ocean, we admire each other. Neruda paid multiple visits to China and wrote poems such as Cancion de la tierra China and El Viento de la Asia, in which he expressed his love and best wishes for China. His works have been widely read in China with influence on many Chinese poets. Jose Venturelli, a famous artist of Chile, lived in China for years. He learned from the skills of Chinese ink painting and created works such as the Yangtze River, which demonstrated his strong attachment to China. These poems and paintings reflect the profound friendship between the two peoples. These Chilean friends established the Chile-China Cultural Association, the first non-governmental organization committed to developing friendly ties with China in Latin America, and encouraged a great number of visionary people to join in the cause of growing China-Chile friendship. In Santiago, there is a Yangtze River Primary School, whose name signifies that China-Chile friendship is as vibrant as the Yangtze River.
中智两国人民素有守望相助的传统。在2010年那场举世瞩目的智利矿难救援行动中，中国机械设备制造企业积极参与，为营救33名矿工作出了贡献。2015年智利北部发生严重洪灾，中国第一时间向智方伸出援手，广大旅居智利的华侨华人也纷纷解囊相助，智方积极营救受困中国公民，体现了两国人民患难与共的真挚情感。	
The two peoples have the tradition of helping and supporting each other. When the devastating mining accident occurred in Chile in 2010, a Chinese equipment-making company was actively involved in the rescue operation and contributed to the rescue of 33 miners. In 2015 when north Chile was hit by a massive flood, China lent its support immediately and the Chinese community in Chile also made generous donations. Relevant authorities in Chile offered timely help to the Chinese nationals stranded in the flood. All this has reflected the sincere friendship between our two peoples who share weal and woe.
中智两国人民素有敢为人先的传统。两国关系创造了多项“第一”。46年前，阿连德总统以他非凡的远见卓识，在南美国家中第一个决定同新中国建立外交关系，开启了中智关系新篇章。智利是第一个就中国加入世界贸易组织同中方签署双边协议、第一个承认中国完全市场经济地位、第一个同中国签署双边自由贸易协定的拉美国家。在自由贸易协定带动下，2015年双边贸易额达到318亿美元，是10年前的近5倍。中国成为智利第一大贸易伙伴和铜、车厘子、蓝莓、海鲜、葡萄酒等产品的最大出口目的地，智利跃居中国在拉美的第三大贸易伙伴。不久前，中国建设银行智利分行作为拉美首家人民币清算行正式开业，为中智关系增添了新的“第一”。在两国历届政府和社会各界共同努力下，中智关系枝繁叶茂、硕果累累。	
The two peoples have the tradition of making pioneering efforts. A number of "firsts" have been achieved in our bilateral ties. Former President Salvador Allende, with his extraordinary vision, decided to establish diplomatic ties with New China 46 years ago, making Chile the first country in South America to do so and opening a new chapter in China-Chile relations. Chile was the first Latin American country to sign a bilateral agreement with China on its WTO accession, to recognize China as a full market economy and to sign with China a bilateral Free Trade Agreement (FTA). Driven by the FTA, our bilateral trade volume reached 31.8 billion U.S. dollars in 2015, nearly five folds of that ten years ago. China has become Chile's largest trading partner and its largest export market of such products as copper, cherry, blueberry, sea food and wine. Chile has become China's third largest trading partner in Latin America. Not long ago, China Construction Bank opened its branch in Chile and became the first RMB settlement bank in Latin America, adding another "first" to our relations. Thanks to the concerted efforts of our two governments and people from all sectors, our bilateral ties have grown from strength to strength and yielded fruitful results.
中国人将美好的姻缘称为“金玉良缘”。2008年北京奥运会金牌就是用智利金和中国玉制作而成。这一枚枚奖牌象征着中智两国人民情同手足的缘分。	
The Chinese people refer to a good relationship as "a bond of gold and jade." The gold medals for 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing were made of gold from Chile and jade from China. These medals are symbols of the brotherly relations between the Chinese and Chilean peoples.
中智关系之所以能够长期稳定发展，是因为双方坚持平等相待、互尊互信，是因为双方坚持优势互补、互利共赢，更是因为双方坚持与时俱进、开拓进取，推动两国关系迈向一个又一个新高度。	
The China-Chile ties have enjoyed long-term stable growth because both sides are committed to treating each other as equals with mutual respect and trust and leveraging mutual complementarity for win-win outcomes. More importantly, both sides have kept up with the times and made pioneering efforts to push bilateral relations to new highs.
当前，国际形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，世界经济复苏步履维艰，全球性挑战不断增多。中智两国都处在发展的关键阶段，面临相似的机遇和挑战。中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力。智利也在改革发展的道路上奋力前行。共同的发展使命将我们更加紧密地联系在一起。	
The international situation is now undergoing profound and complex changes. The world economic recovery is in difficulty and global challenges are on the rise. Both China and Chile are at a critical stage of development and face similar opportunities and challenges. The Chinese people are working hard for achieving the two centenary goals (i.e., to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the time the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary in 2021 and to turn China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious by the time the People's Republic of China celebrates its centenary in 2049) and realizing the great renewal of the Chinese nation. Chile is also making great efforts along its path of reform and development. Such a common mission of development has further strengthened our existing close ties.
拉美朋友常说，“独行快，众行远”。我期待通过这次访问，同智利各界朋友深入交流，发扬中智关系优良传统，规划两国合作新蓝图，推动中智两国在共同发展的道路上携手共进。	
Friends in Latin America often say that one can walk fast when traveling alone and walk a long distance when traveling with friends. I look forward to in-depth exchanges with friends from various sectors of Chile during this visit so that we can carry forward the fine tradition of China-Chile relations and draw a new blueprint for bilateral cooperation to advance common development of our two countries.
——我们要坚持相互尊重，筑牢政治基础。双方要加强全方位交往，坚定支持对方走符合本国国情的发展道路，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持。	
-- We should remain committed to mutual respect and consolidate political foundation for our relations. Our two countries should strengthen exchanges in all aspects, give each other firm support in our respective efforts to follow a development path suited to our national realities and render each other understanding and support on issues bearing on each other's core interests and major concerns.
——我们要加强战略对接，促进共同发展。双方要完善自由贸易区建设，促进贸易和投资便利化，提升相互投资水平，深化矿业、农业、基础设施建设、通信、清洁能源、科技创新等领域合作，给两国人民带来更多福祉。	
-- We should enhance our complementarity and promote common development. Our two countries should improve the building of FTA, promote trade and investment facilitation and increase mutual investment. We should deepen cooperation in mining, agriculture, infrastructure, communications, clean energy and scientific innovation so as to bring more benefits to the two peoples.
——我们要扩大人文交流，巩固传统友谊。智利文学家米斯特拉尔说，“友谊是相互信任，是长存于心”。双方要常来常往，扩大文化、教育、体育、旅游等领域交流合作，让两国人民友谊薪火相传。	
-- We should expand cultural and people-to-people exchanges and consolidate traditional friendship. Gabriela Mistral, a Chilean writer, said that friendship is mutual trust deeply rooted in heart. Our two sides should further facilitate people-to-people exchanges and expand cooperation in such areas as culture, education, sports and tourism so that the friendship between the two peoples will be carried forward from generation to generation.
——我们要加强战略协作，维护共同利益。中智都是环太平洋重要国家，双方要加强在联合国、亚太经合组织等多边机制内的沟通和协调，加快推动亚太自由贸易区建设，为世界经济发展增添新动力。	
-- We should strengthen strategic coordination and uphold our common interest. China and Chile, as two important Pacific-rim countries, should enhance communication and coordination in the United Nations, APEC and other multilateral mechanisms and push for the building of the Asia-Pacific FTA so as to add new impetus to the world economic development.
当前，拉美国家在发展道路上面临的挑战有所增多，但依然是充满希望的热土。正如聂鲁达所说，“如果我们看一看美洲地图，正视那伟大的万千气象”，我们就会对拉美的未来信心倍增。智利是拉美的门户，目前担任拉美太平洋联盟轮值主席国，在地区事务中发挥着重要作用。中方愿同智方一道，推动中拉全面合作伙伴关系得到更大发展，构建携手共进的命运共同体。	
Although Latin American countries now face more challenges on their way to development, this land is still full of hope. As Neruda once said, if we look at the map of America, we will find a very promising vista. We will then have greater confidence in the future of Latin America. Chile, as the gateway to Latin America and the current rotating chair of the Pacific Alliance, plays an important role in regional affairs. China is ready to work with Chile to push China-Latin America Comprehensive Cooperative Partnership forward for greater development and build a community of shared future.
“海内存知己，天涯若比邻。”在经济全球化、社会信息化深入发展的今天，太平洋早已不再是将中国和智利分开的屏障，而是联系我们的纽带和桥梁。让我们一起努力，携手开创中智关系更加美好的未来。	
As a Chinese poem goes, "If you have a friend afar who knows your heart, distance can't keep you two apart." With the advancement of economic globalization and IT application, the Pacific Ocean can no longer keep China and Chile apart. Instead, it is a bond or a bridge linking our two countries. So let us work together for a more promising future of China-Chile relations.
78. 习近平在柬埔寨媒体发表署名文章《做肝胆相照的好邻居、真朋友》
做肝胆相照的好邻居、真朋友
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
China and Cambodia: Good Neighbors and Trusted Friends
By H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
应柬埔寨王国国王西哈莫尼邀请，我将对柬埔寨王国进行国事访问。这是我担任中国国家主席后首次访问柬埔寨，我对这次访问充满期待。	
At the invitation of King Norodom Sihamoni, I will pay a state visit to the Kingdom of Cambodia. This will be my first visit to Cambodia as the President of China, a visit I look forward to with great anticipation.
柬埔寨是古代海上丝绸之路重要一站，拥有悠久辉煌的历史文化和独具特色的高棉文化。勤劳智慧的柬埔寨人民创造了璀璨夺目的吴哥古迹，其宏伟的建筑和精美的浮雕壁画巧夺天工，令人叹为观止，在人类文明史上留下了不朽篇章。进入21世纪，柬埔寨国家建设事业蒸蒸日上，人民生活水平不断提高，未来值得期待。	
Cambodia, an important link on the ancient Maritime Silk Road, is renowned for its rich history and the unique Khmer culture. Angkor Wat, with its magnificent architecture and stunning bas-reliefs, stands as a true tribute to the talent of the Cambodian people and shines in the annals of human civilization. Entering the 21st century, Cambodia has made much progress in its development and delivered a better life to its people. It is heading towards a promising future.
中国同柬埔寨地理相近、文化相通，两国友好交往历史可以追溯到1000多年前。通过海上丝绸之路，中国的瓷器、漆器，柬埔寨的香料、黄蜡，源源不断送达对方民众手中。巴戎寺的壁画上雕刻有古代中国商人同柬埔寨人民往来的生动情景。5世纪至6世纪中国南北朝时期，僧伽婆罗、曼陀罗、须菩提3位高僧先后来中国传经弘法。中国元代使节周达观到访柬埔寨后写下《真腊风土记》一书，记载了吴哥的风土人情和中柬两国人民的友好往来。中国明代航海家郑和远洋航海时多次在柬埔寨停留，称这里“气候常热，田禾丰足，煮海为盐，风俗富饶”。坐落在磅湛市郊的三保公庙香火绵延，诉说着中柬两国人民的不解之缘。	
China and Cambodia are geographically and culturally close to each other, and our friendly exchanges trace back more than a millennium. Through the ancient Maritime Silk Road, Chinese porcelain and lacquer wares were brought to Cambodia, and Cambodian spices and yellow wax stones were sent to China. The bas-reliefs of the Bayon Temple vividly depict the scenes of Chinese merchants trading with the locals in Cambodia. During China's Southern and Northern Dynasties in the fifth and sixth centuries AD, Sanghapala, Mandrasena and Subhuti, three eminent Cambodian monks, came to China to disseminate Buddhism. In China's Yuan Dynasty, Zhou Daguan, a Chinese envoy, visited Cambodia. He later wrote The Customs of Cambodia, providing a vivid account of the local customs in Angkor and the friendly interactions between Chinese and Cambodians. Zheng He, the famous navigator from China's Ming Dynasty, made many stopovers in Cambodia on his voyages. He described Cambodia as a land with a warm climate and fertile fields where the locals boiled seawater to make salt and had colorful customs. The Sam Po Kong Temple in the suburb of Kampong Cham that honors Zheng He still has many visitors today, a testament to the time-honored friendship between Chinese and Cambodians.
柬埔寨谚语说“信任如树”，中柬传统友谊历经岁月洗礼和国际风云变幻考验，始终根深叶茂。这得益于两国老一辈领导人的精心培育。1958年，中国同柬埔寨正式建交，两国关系开启新篇章。58年来，两国历代领导人密切交往，建立了深厚友谊。西哈努克太皇动情地说：“柬中之间长期牢固的友谊，像一朵永不凋谢的鲜花，永远开放在晴朗的天空下。”这是中柬友好的真实写照。	
A Cambodian proverb likens trust to the growth of a tree. The traditional China-Cambodia friendship, tested by the times and a changing international landscape, has grown strong like a luxuriant tree thanks to efforts made by past leaders of both countries. In 1958, China and Cambodia established diplomatic ties, opening a new chapter in their bilateral relations. Over the past 58 years, successive leaders of both countries have maintained close interactions and developed a close bond of friendship. King Father Norodom Sihanouk once fondly said that the China-Cambodia friendship is like a flower that never withers and will always blossom under the bright sky.
进入新时期，中柬友谊历久弥新、不断传承和发扬光大。两国政治上高度互信，经济上互利双赢，各领域务实合作成果丰硕，在国际和地区事务中保持密切沟通和协调，堪称国与国平等相待、真诚合作的典范。	
Entering the new era, the China-Cambodia friendship has continued to flourish, beaming with new vitality. Our two countries enjoy deep political trust and win-win economic cooperation. We have carried out fruitful cooperation in various areas, and maintained close consultation and coordination on international and regional affairs, setting an example of how two countries should treat each other as equals and cooperate with absolute sincerity.
2010年，中柬两国建立全面战略合作伙伴关系，双边关系进入新时期。两国在国家发展理念上高度契合，一致同意加快“一带一路”倡议和“四角”战略对接。近年来，双边贸易和双向投资保持强劲增长势头，中国已经连续3年是柬埔寨第一大贸易伙伴、第一大投资来源国，2015年双边贸易额突破44亿美元。
In 2010, China and Cambodia established a comprehensive strategic partnership, ushering their ties into a new era. We share a similar development philosophy, and we agree to find ways for China's "Belt and Road" initiative and Cambodia's "Rectangular Strategy" to work together. Two-way trade and investment have maintained strong growth in recent years. China has been Cambodia's biggest trading partner and source of investment for three years. The year 2015 saw our two-way trade topping 4.4 billion U.S. dollars.
中国和柬埔寨是肝胆相照的好朋友。在关乎彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上，两国风雨同舟、守望相助。在柬埔寨争取国家独立和民族解放、维护和平安定的斗争中，中国给予柬埔寨坚定支持和帮助。上世纪90年代，中国派出800多人的工兵部队参加柬埔寨维和行动。在18个月时间里，他们完成了金边国际机场等3个机场、4条共长640多公里国家级公路的建造和修复任务，架设和修复桥梁40多座。他们用鲜血和汗水培育了中柬友谊。
China and Cambodia are devoted friends. On issues concerning each other's core interests and major concerns, our two countries have stood together and supported each other. China firmly supports and has assisted Cambodia in its fight for independence and liberation, as well as maintaining peace and stability. In the 1990s, a Chinese engineering corps of over 800 men took part in peacekeeping missions in Cambodia. In just 18 months, they built and repaired the Phnom Penh International Airport and two other airports, four national-level highways over 640 km in length and over 40 bridges. With blood and sweat, the Chinese peacekeepers helped nurture the China-Cambodia friendship.
我们不会忘记，在新中国成立之初遭受外部封锁和敌视的时候，柬埔寨率先同中国建交。在中国恢复在联合国合法席位的斗争中，柬埔寨给予坚定支持。在中国坚决维护国家领土主权和海洋权益、致力于通过和平谈判解决争端的时刻，柬埔寨秉持公正、仗义执言。在中国四川、青海、甘肃等地发生严重自然灾害时，柬埔寨王室、政府领导人、社会各界感同身受，伸出援助之手。中国人常说，“患难见真情”。柬埔寨谚语说，“只有在患难中，才能识别谁是真朋友，谁是假朋友”。中国人民和柬埔寨人民重情守诺、坦诚相待，中柬友好已经深深扎根于两国人民心中。	
We will never forget that Cambodia was among the first group of countries to establish diplomatic ties with New China when it faced a foreign blockade in its early days. Cambodia was firm in supporting China's efforts to restore its lawful seat in the United Nations. When China acted to safeguard its territorial sovereignty and maritime interests and was devoted to resolving related disputes through peaceful negotiation, Cambodia did not hesitate to speak out to uphold justice. When China's Sichuan, Qinghai and Gansu provinces were hit by natural disasters, the Cambodian royal family, government leaders and public shared our grief and extended a helping hand to us. We have a Chinese saying -- "Hardship reveals true friendship." Similarly, a Cambodian saying goes "Only in tough time can one tell a true friend from a false one." Our two peoples value our ties and treat each other as true friends; the China-Cambodia friendship has developed deep roots in the hearts of both peoples.
中国和柬埔寨是情同手足的好邻居。在推进国家建设、促进民生发展中，两国互帮互助。中国援建了柬埔寨第一条全线四车道国道，承建了柬埔寨第一家水泥厂、第一座火电站、最大规模的水电站。蓬勃发展的西哈努克港经济特区是中柬务实合作的样板。截至2016年6月，累计进入西哈努克港经济特区的企业达100家，投资额2.8亿美元，解决了超过1.3万柬埔寨民众就业问题。两国发挥经济互补优势，深挖潜力，在基础设施建设、农业水利、能源资源、信息通信等领域合作规模不断扩大、水平不断提高，一系列合作项目早期收获前景可期。	
China and Cambodia are neighbors who share a bond of brotherhood. The two countries have supported each other in improving the livelihoods of their respective people. China built Cambodia's first four-lane national highway as an assistance project and was contracted to build Cambodia's first cement plant, first coal-fired power station and its largest hydropower station. The booming Sihanoukville Special Economic Zone stands as testimony to how fruitful China-Cambodia cooperation can be. By June 2016, 100 companies were operating in the zone with a total investment of 280 million U.S. dollars, creating over 13,000 jobs. By strengthening economic complementarity and unlocking potential, our two countries have expanded and upgraded cooperation in infrastructure, agriculture, water conservancy, energy, resources, information and telecommunications; such cooperation projects are expected to deliver early returns.
中柬两国人文交流日益密切，给双边关系不断注入新的活力。中国文物专家长年扎根柬埔寨，保护和修复周萨神殿、茶胶寺等吴哥文物古迹。中国医疗专家赴柬埔寨巡回义诊，为上千柬埔寨民众实施白内障手术。中国农技专家深入柬埔寨农村，白天传授农业技术，晚上教授汉语，受到柬埔寨民众欢迎和喜爱。2009年在柬埔寨成立的孔子学院，已经由1个教学点发展到14个教学点，在校生超过1万名。截至2015年，通过中国政府奖学金来华留学的柬埔寨学生突破1000人。	
China and Cambodia enjoy flourishing people-to-people and cultural exchanges, which have added strong momentum to the growth of their relations. Chinese cultural relics experts have spent years in Cambodia to protect and restore the Chau Say Tevoda Temple and the Ta Keo Temple in Angkor. Chinese doctors have performed free cataract operations for over 1,000 patients across Cambodia. Chinese agro-technicians have passed on agro-technologies to Cambodian villagers during the day and taught them Chinese in the evening, moves that have been warmly received by the locals. The Confucius Institute launched in Cambodia in 2009 now offers classes to over 10,000 students in 14 different locations. By 2015, more than 1,000 Cambodian students were studying in China on scholarship programs sponsored by the Chinese government.
当前，中国和柬埔寨都处在发展的关键阶段，面临全面深化改革、扩大对外开放、优化产业结构的相同任务，同为区域经济一体化和区域合作的推动者、建设者。站在中柬关系新起点上，中国将同柬埔寨一道努力，推动两国全面战略合作伙伴关系实现全方位、多领域、深层次发展，更好造福两国人民。	
Both China and Cambodia are at crucial stages in their respective development and face the similar tasks of deepening reform, opening further and upgrading their economic structures. Both countries are committed to economic integration and cooperation in our region. Having reached a new stage in its relations with Cambodia, China will work with Cambodia to strengthen their bilateral comprehensive strategic partnership in a wide range of areas so as to deliver greater benefits to the two peoples.
——持之以恒深化政治互信。中方愿同柬方保持高层互访势头，加强战略沟通，希望两国政府、政党、立法机关、地方省市加强交往。中国将一如既往支持柬埔寨走符合本国国情的发展道路，坚定不移支持柬埔寨维护国家主权、保持国内稳定、加快经济发展。	
-- We will also deepen political trust. China will maintain high-level visits and enhance communication with Cambodia. I hope that the two countries will step up exchanges between their governments, political parties and legislatures as well as at the sub-national level. China will continue to support Cambodia in pursuing a development path that suits its own national conditions and firmly support Cambodia in safeguarding sovereignty, maintaining domestic stability and accelerating economic development.
——扎实深入推动互利合作。中方愿同柬方加强发展战略对接，打造“一带一路”合作亮点，因地制宜深化产能合作，推动农业水利、基础设施、信息通信等领域合作取得务实成果。中方愿采取措施扩大从柬埔寨进口，扩大双边贸易规模。	
-- We will take solid steps to promote win-win cooperation. China will continue to examine how our respective development strategies can complement one another and launch priority projects within the "Belt and Road" initiative to better involve Cambodia. We will, in light of local conditions, deepen cooperation in areas such as agriculture, water conservancy, infrastructure, information and telecommunications. China will take measures to increase imports from Cambodia and scale up two-way trade.
——坚定不移加强国际协作。中国支持柬埔寨作为东盟重要成员在本地区事务中发挥重要作用，愿同柬方在东亚合作、澜沧江－湄公河合作、联合国等地区和多边舞台加强协调和配合，维护两国和发展中国家共同利益，积极打造亚洲命运共同体。东亚合作正处在关键发展阶段，我们应该继续聚焦发展主题，推动东亚合作健康稳定发展。	
-- We will strengthen coordination with Cambodia on the international stage. China supports Cambodia as an important member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and will deepen collaboration with Cambodia in East Asia, the Lancang-Mekong River, the United Nations and other regional and multilateral arenas. The purpose of such collaboration is to uphold the common interests of our two countries and other developing countries and build an Asian community with a shared future. East Asia cooperation has entered a critical stage. We should continue to focus on the general goal of development and promote sound and steady progress in East Asia.
——细水长流促进民心相通。中方愿同柬方一道，用好孔子学院、中国文化之家等平台，加强在教育文化、旅游卫生等方面合作，增进两国人民特别是两国青年相互了解和友好感情，让中柬友好世代相传。	
-- We will endeavor to enhance people-to-people friendship. China will work with Cambodia to unleash the full potential of the Confucius Institute and the China Culture Center and enhance cooperation in education, culture, tourism and health. With these efforts, we can deepen mutual understanding and friendship between our two peoples, especially among young people, and ensure that the China-Cambodia friendship will be passed on from generation to generation.
我深信，在我们共同努力下，中柬传统友谊一定会结出新硕果，我们将永远做肝胆相照的好邻居、真朋友。	
I am convinced that with our concerted efforts, the traditional friendship between China and Cambodia will bear more fruits, allowing us to forever be good neighbors and genuine trusted friends.
93. 习近平在沙特媒体发表署名文章《做共同发展的好伙伴》
做共同发展的好伙伴
Be Good Partners for Common Development
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
By H. E. Xi JinpingPresident of the People's Republic of China
沙特是我今年首次出访的第一站，也是我担任中国国家主席后访问的第一个阿拉伯国家。
Saudi Arabia is the first stop of my first overseas visit this year and also the first Arab country I will visit as President of the People's Republic of China.
沙特是中国的兄弟国家。一提到沙特，人们想到的是“石油王国”得天独厚的油气宝藏，伊斯兰教发源地的悠久历史，大漠落日的壮美辽阔。
China sees Saudi Arabia as a brotherly state. An oil kingdom with huge oil and gas reserves, a country with time-honored history which is the birthplace of Islam, and the magnificent setting sun against the vast expanse of the desert: these are the images that Saudi Arabia brings to our mind.
2008年，我以中国国家副主席身份访问沙特，沙特国家建设欣欣向荣，人民热情好客，给我留下美好印象。
In 2008, I visited Saudi Arabia as Vice Chinese President, and I was greatly impressed by its prosperity and the hospitality of its people.
时隔8年，我将应萨勒曼国王邀请，带着中国人民对沙特人民的情谊和对发展中沙友好关系的期盼，再次踏上这片美丽富饶的土地。
Eight years on, at the invitation of His Majesty Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, King of Saudi Arabia, I will once again set foot on this beautiful and rich land, and I will bring with me the Chinese people's friendship towards the Saudi Arabian people and their keen desire to grow friendly ties between our two countries.
中国人说，患难见真情。沙特有句俗语：“向急于求助的人伸出援手是最大的善行。” 2008年中国四川汶川特大地震发生后，沙特第一时间向中国提供6000多万美元的现金和物资援助，这是中国政府收到的最大一笔海外单项援助。沙特政府和人民的援助是中沙友谊的生动体现。中国人民深受感动，将永远铭记于心。
We Chinese often say that true friendship stands out in time of adversity. And people in Saudi Arabia also believe that "there is no greater virtue than extending a helping hand to those in need". In the aftermath of the devastating earthquake that hit Wenchuan of China's Sichuan Province in 2008, Saudi Arabia immediately provided over US$60 million of both cash and material assistance to China, the largest item of overseas assistance ever received by the Chinese government. This assistance provided by the Saudi Arabian government people, a vivid symbol of the China-Saudi Arabia friendship, deeply moved the Chinese people and will always be remembered by us.
中沙两国人民友好交往源远流长。2000多年前，古丝绸之路上，往来于双方的驼队络绎不绝。中国唐代时期，大食国遣使来华。中国明代穆斯林航海家郑和远航吉达、麦加、麦地那等地，盛赞所到之处“民风和美”，“诚为极乐世界”。中华文明和伊斯兰文明交流互鉴，在人类文明交流史上留下了深刻印记。
The peoples of China and Saudi Arabia have enjoyed friendly exchanges for centuries. Over 2000 years ago, numerous camel caravans from the two sides travelled along the ancient Silk Road. Diplomatic envoys from the Seljuk Empire visited China during the Tang Dynasty. Zheng He, China's Muslim navigator in the Ming Dynasty, travelled to Jeddah, Mecca and Medina, and he described them as paradises where people enjoyed peace and harmony. The interactions and mutual learning between the Chinese and Islamic civilizations are an important part in the history of inter-civilization exchanges.
1990年中沙建交，开启了两国关系新篇章。特别是2008年建立战略性友好关系以来，中沙关系实现跨越式发展，各领域务实合作达到前所未有的广度和深度。沙特连续多年是中国在全球第一大原油供应国和在西亚非洲地区第一大贸易伙伴。2013年，中国首次成为沙特第一大贸易伙伴。2014年，中沙双边贸易额比建交时增长230多倍，达到691亿美元。如今，中国每进口6桶原油就有1桶来自沙特，沙特出口每收入7里亚尔就有1里亚尔来自中国。
The establishment of diplomatic ties between China and Saudi Arabia in 1990 opened a new chapter in their relations. In particular, since the establishment of the strategic and friendly relationship between the two countries in 2008, China-Saudi Arabia relations have progressed by leaps and bounds, with enormous growth made in all-round corporation. For years, Saudi Arabia has been China's biggest global supplier of crude oil and its biggest trading partner in West Asia and Africa. In 2013, China became the biggest trading partner of Saudi Arabia for the first time. Two-way trade reached US$69.1 billion in 2014, growing by 230 times over that at the time of the establishment of diplomatic ties. Today, one in six barrels of crude oil China imports comes from Saudi Arabia, and one out of every seven Riyal Saudi Arabia earns from its exports comes from China.
中沙基础设施建设、投资、劳务、农业等领域合作项目不胜枚举，合作规模不断扩大。中国公司在圣城麦加铺设的轻轨项目为来自全球的穆斯林朝觐者提供了便捷服务。中国公司开发朝觐通信保障方案，连续多年确保了朝觐期间通信畅通。中沙两国科研机构成功绘制了椰枣基因组图谱，对椰枣产量、品种改良、病虫害防治等产生重要影响。
China and Saudi Arabia are also expanding the cooperation, with numerous cooperation projects being undertaken in infrastructure, investment, labor and agriculture. The light rail line constructed by a Chinese company in the sacred city of Mecca provides convenient travel services to Muslim pilgrims from around the world. Chinese companies have provided good telecommunication services for the pilgrimage for many years. Our scientific and research institutes successfully completed the genetic map for date palms, leading to increased yields, better strains and stronger capacity of pest resistance.
中沙人文交流日益密切。2010年上海世博会，沙特精心打造的“丝路宝船”是最具人气的场馆之一，参观的游人至今仍然络绎不绝。2013年，中国作为主宾国参加沙特杰纳第利亚遗产文化节，向沙特民众近距离展示既有传统文化传承又具现代发展创新的活力中国。“海内存知己，天涯若比邻。”日益密切的友好合作让两国人民的心更紧地贴在一起。
China and Saudi Arabia enjoy increasingly close people-to-people exchanges. The Silk Road Treasure Boat Pavilion built by Saudi Arabia for the 2010 World Expo in Shanghai was one of its most popular pavilions, and it still attracts numerous visitors today. In 2013, China attended the Jenadrivah Heritage and Culture Festival in Saudi Arabia as the country of honor, enabling Saudi visitors to intimately learn about a dynamic and innovative China that enjoys both a traditional cultural heritage and success of modern development. As a Chinese saying goes, "devoted friends afar are not kept apart by distance". The growing friendship and cooperation are bringing our two peoples closer than ever before.
中沙关系精彩纷呈，给我们许多有益经验和启迪。我认为，互尊互信、平等相待是中沙关系健康稳定发展的牢固基础；优势互补、互利共赢是中沙关系长期造福两国人民的强大动力；坦诚相见、民心相亲是中沙友谊历久弥新的不竭源泉。
There is so much inspiration we can draw from the flourishing ties between China and Saudi Arabia: Mutual respect, mutual trust and equality are the solid foundation of the sound and steady growth of the bilateral relationship; tapping our respective strength for mutual benefit provides powerful impetus for our relationship to deliver long-term benefits to our two peoples; and openness and amity between our peoples are the inexhaustible source of strength for sustaining China-Saudi Arabia friendship.
纵观中沙各自的经济社会发展进程，我们发现，两国都立足国情，走适合自身的发展道路；都着眼长远，推进经济可持续和多元化发展；都以人为本，不断提高人民生活水平。高度契合的发展理念为双方关系发展开辟了广阔空间。
A review of our respective progress in economic and social development shows that China and Saudi Arabia have so much in common: Both countries have followed development paths suited to their national conditions; both of us have achieved future-oriented sustainable economic development in diverse ways; and both countries have endeavored to improve our people's lives. Our highly compatible visions on development will greatly boost the growth of China-Saudi Arabia relations.
当前，中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。沙特也开始实施新的五年计划，致力于促进经济多元化发展战略，实现国家全面、平衡、协调发展。
The Chinese people are making tireless efforts to realize the two "centenary goals", namely, to finish the building of a country of initial prosperity in all respects when the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary in 2021 and turn China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious when the People's Republic celebrates its centenary in 2049. We are also endeavoring to achieve the Chinese dream of great national renewal. Saudi Arabia has started the implementation of a new five-year plan and vigorously pursued a strategy of diversified economic development to achieve all-round, balanced and coordinated development.
相近的发展诉求、相同的发展使命、相融的发展利益为中沙关系向纵深发展提供了持久动力。
Similar development aspirations, same development missions and converged development interests provide enduring impetus to the in-depth growth of China-Saudi Arabia relations.
中沙是有重要影响力的国家，面临着推动双边关系发展的重要历史机遇。我期待通过这次访问，同沙特领导人一道，提高双边关系水平，推动两国互利合作向更深层次、更高水平跨越，更好造福两国人民。
China and Saudi Arabia, both countries with important influence, will embrace a great historic opportunity of advancing their bilateral relations. By making this visit, I look forward to working together with the leaders of Saudi Arabia to elevate the bilateral relations, upgrade mutually beneficial cooperation and deliver more benefits to our two peoples.
——我们要做相互支持、真诚互信的战略伙伴。双方应该从战略高度和长远角度把握两国关系大方向，加强国家发展战略对接，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持，巩固政治互信。
---Let us forge a strategic partnership of mutual support, sincerity and mutual trust. We should bear in mind the strategic nature of China-Saudi Arabia relations and ensure their long-term and sound growth, form synergy between our respective development strategies, increase mutual understanding to and support each other on issues relating to our respective core interests and major concerns, and cement political mutual trust.
——我们要做合作共赢、共同发展的互惠伙伴。双方应该扩大双边贸易规模，打造长期稳定的中沙能源合作共同体，加强基础设施建设、投资领域合作，并以航天、和平利用核能、可再生能源三大高技术领域为突破口，丰富中沙务实合作内容。中方赞赏沙特以意向创始成员国身份加入亚洲基础设施投资银行，也愿同沙方一道加快推动中国—海湾合作委员会自由贸易区建设，使双边合作和多边合作形成良好互动局面，不断提高两国互利合作水平。
---Let us forge a win-win partnership of mutual benefit and common development. We should expand trade, build a long-term, stable China-Saudi Arabia community of energy corporation, enhance cooperation in infrastructure and investment, and prioritize three hi-tech sectors, namely, aerospace, peaceful use of nuclear energy and renewable energy, in our efforts to enrich practical cooperation. China welcomes Saudi Arabia's joining the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank as a prospective founding member; and we will work with Saudi Arabia to accelerate efforts to build the China-Gulf Cooperation Council Free Trade Area. All those efforts will reinforce both our bilateral and multilateral cooperation and yield greater benefits to both countries.
——我们要做同舟共济、携手同行的合作伙伴。中方愿同沙方加强多边领域合作，维护地区和平稳定、促进共同发展。为促进区域互联互通和共同发展，中方提出了共建丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路的构想。我们希望并相信地处“一带一路”西端交汇地带的沙特将成为“一带一路”的重要参与者、建设者、受益者。
---Let us forge a partnership of expanding cooperation and solitary. China will enhance cooperation with Saudi Arabia multilaterally to maintain regional peace and stability and promote common development. To advance regional connectivity and common development, China has launched the initiative of jointly building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road (the Belt and Road Initiative). We hope and trust that Saudi Arabia, located at the west crossroads of the Belt and Road, will become an important participant of, contributor to and beneficiary of this initiative.
——我们要做往来密切、交流互鉴的友好伙伴。朋友越交越深。中方愿同沙方扩大教育、新闻、智库、青年等领域交流合作，加强各层次人文交流。欢迎更多沙特朋友到中国走一走、看一看，你们每一个人都可以成为传播中沙友好的使者。
--Let us forge a friendly partnership of frequent exchanges and mutual learning. Frequent exchanges will deepen friendship. China will step up exchange and cooperation with Saudi Arabia in areas such as education, media, think tanks and the youth and enhance people-to-people and cultural exchanges and at various levels. I welcome more Saudi Arabians to visit China, and I am sure there is much you can do personally to contribute to China-Saudi Arabia friendship through these visits.
让我们携手努力，共同创造中沙关系更加美好的明天。
Let us join hands to deliver an even brighter future for China-Saudi Arabia relations!
83. 习近平在波兰媒体发表署名文章《推动中波友谊航船全速前进》
推动中波友谊航船全速前进
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Setting Sail for Full Speed Progress of China-Poland Friendship
By H.E. Xi Jinping,
President of the People's Republic of China
应杜达总统邀请，我将对波兰共和国进行国事访问，这是我担任中国国家主席后首次访问波兰。我期待着同杜达总统以及波兰其他领导人就提高两国关系水平、深化务实合作、加强中波在重大国际和地区问题上的协调合作深入交换意见。	
At the invitation by President Duda, I will soon be making a state visit to the Republic of Poland, which will be my first visit to Poland as the Chinese President. I look forward to having in-depth discussions with President Duda and other Polish leaders on enhancing bilateral relations, deepening practical cooperation and strengthening coordination and cooperation between China and Poland on major international and regional issues.
上世纪90年代，我到过波兰，那次访问给我留下了深刻印象。波兰人民勤劳勇敢智慧，历史文化底蕴深厚。哥白尼探索宇宙之无限大，创立“日心说”，改变了人类的宇宙观。居里夫人认识微观世界之无限小，发现钋和镭两种新元素，促进了放射性理论发展和应用。同世界上所有音乐爱好者一样，中国人民喜爱音乐大师肖邦的作品，特别是肖邦钢琴曲的优美旋律始终回荡我们心间。	
I visited Poland in the 1990s, which left me a deep impression. The Polish people are diligent, intelligent and courageous, and the country has a proud history and brilliant culture. Nicolaus Copernicus, exploring the vast universe, pioneered the theory of "the Sun rather than the Earth at the center of the Universe," transforming mankind's understanding of the Universe. Madam Curie, studying the micro world, discovered the two isotopes of Polonium and Radium, which paved the way for the development and application of the theory of radioactivity. Like music lovers all over the world, the Chinese people are fond of F.F. Chopin, a towering musician of Poland. The melodious tunes of Chopin's piano compositions, in particular, have a powerful resonance in our hearts.
中波两国虽然相距遥远，但彼此交往源远流长。17世纪中叶，波兰传教士卜弥格来到中国，广泛研究中国社会、历史、医学、地理等学科，发表大量著作，是首位向西方介绍中国古代科学文化成果的欧洲人，被誉为“波兰的马可·波罗”。中波两国都有一句谚语叫“患难见真情”，第二次世界大战期间，两国人民彼此同情、相互支持，结下深厚友谊。傅拉都、戎格曼等波兰友人不远万里来华，为中国抗日战争提供医疗支援，乌尔班诺维奇、什曼凯维奇等波兰军人参加盟国军队援华。波兰人民为最终战胜法西斯、赢得世界和平付出了巨大牺牲，作出了重大贡献。	
Though China and Poland are geographically far apart, our friendly interactions date back centuries. In the middle of the 17th century, Polish missionary Michal Boym came to China. He wrote many books based on his extensive study of Chinese society, history, medicine and geography, and became the first European to introduce scientific and cultural achievements of ancient China to the West, winning the reputation of "the Marco Polo of Poland." Both the Chinese and the Poles believe that "true friendship stands out in difficult times." This was borne out during the WWII when our two peoples sympathized with and supported each other, forging a deep friendship. Dr. S. Flato, Wolf Jungerman and many other Polish friends traveled long distances to provide medical support in China during its war of resistance against Japanese aggression. Witold Urbanowicz and Wlodzimierz Szymankiewicz fought in China as members of the allied forces assisting China. With heroic sacrifices, the Polish people made important contribution to the final victory of the Anti-Fascist War and the restoration of world peace.
波兰是最早承认并同新中国建交的国家之一。建交67年来，中波两国人民传统友谊不断加深。新中国成立初期，波兰为中国经济社会发展特别是在采矿、制糖、航运等领域提供了大量支持和帮助。1951年成立的中波轮船公司是新中国第一家中外合资企业，至今运营良好。马佐夫舍歌舞团是第一个访问新中国的外国演出团，表演的《玛祖卡》、《波罗乃兹》、《小杜鹃》、《芦笛》等波兰民间歌舞流传至今。	
Poland was among the first countries to establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. The past 67 years of diplomatic ties have witnessed the deepening of traditional friendship between our peoples. In the early years of the People's Republic, Poland gave strong support to China's economic and social development, especially in fields such as mining, sugar making and shipping. The Chinese-Polish Joint Stock Shipping Company, which was set up in 1951 and still runs well today, was the first Sino-foreign joint venture incorporated in the People's Republic. The Mazowsze Polish Folk Song and Dance Ensemble was the first foreign performing group to visit the People's Republic. Its songs and dances, like Mazurkas, Polonaises and Little Cuckoo, are still familiar to many Chinese.
近年来，中波关系快速发展。去年年底，杜达总统成功访华，我们就加强两国高层交往、深化战略互信、推动各领域务实合作达成广泛共识。双方签署关于共同推进“一带一路”建设的政府间谅解备忘录，为两国各领域交流合作奠定了坚实基础。波兰是中东欧地区较早同中国建立战略伙伴关系、第一个加入亚洲基础设施投资银行的国家。	
In recent years, China-Poland relations have enjoyed fast growth. President Duda and I reached extensive agreement on increasing high-level interactions, deepening strategic mutual trust and expanding practical cooperation across the board during his successful visit to China at the end of last year. And the two sides signed an MOU on jointly building the "Belt and Road." All these have laid a solid foundation for exchanges and cooperation between the two countries in all fields. Poland became one of the first countries in Central and Eastern Europe to establish a strategic partnership with China and was the first CEE country to join the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB).
近年来，中波两国经济保持稳定增长，连续多年互为对方在各自地区的最大贸易伙伴。2015年，中波双边贸易额达到170.9亿美元，双向投资稳步增长，双方采矿、基础设施建设、交通物流、金融、航天、科技、农业等领域合作规模不断扩大、水平不断提高。	
In recent years, China and Poland have achieved stable economic growth and remained each other's biggest trading partner in their respective regions for consecutive years. In 2015, two-way trade reached 17.09 billion U.S. dollars. Mutual investment grew steadily. And the two sides continued to expand and enhance cooperation in mining, infrastructure, transportation and logistics, finance, aerospace, science and technology and agriculture.
中波人文交流日益活跃。“欢乐春节·波兰行”已经连续举行6届，波兰文化季、波兰文化节等活动在华开展得有声有色。5所孔子学院相继在波兰落地生根，越来越多的中国高校开设波兰语教学。中波地方论坛成功举办3届，为两国地方交往提供了平台。双方人文交流形式多样、内涵丰富，两国传统友谊薪火相传，不断焕发出新的光彩。	
We also maintained dynamic people-to-people exchanges. "Happy Chinese New Year in Poland" has been held for six years, while such events as Polish culture season and Polish cultural festival are gaining popularity in China. Five Confucius Institutes have been established in Poland. More and more Chinese universities have started to offer Polish language programs. The China-Poland Regional Forum has been held successfully for three sessions, providing a platform for sub-national interactions. Our people-to-people exchange has grown more diverse in form and rich in content, injecting fresh vigor into our traditional friendship.
中东欧是欧洲最有发展潜力的地区，中国和中东欧国家有着深厚传统友谊、真诚合作意愿，经济互补性强，这为中国-中东欧国家合作(“16+1合作”)提供了充沛动力和巨大空间。4年多来，有关各方相互尊重、互利共赢、包容开放，“16+1合作”保持快速发展势头，合作广度和深度不断扩大，已经进入成熟期和收获期。我们要本着面向未来、造福人民的精神，务实推进“16+1合作”，为欧洲繁荣和中欧关系发展作出更大贡献。	
Central and Eastern Europe as a sub-region boasts the greatest potential for growth in all of Europe. China and Central and Eastern European countries (CEECs) share a profound traditional friendship, sincere desire for cooperation and strong economic complementarity. This is the source of the vitality and great potential for cooperation between China and the CEECs (16+1 cooperation). Over the past four years, guided by the spirit of mutual respect, mutual benefit, openness and inclusiveness, the 16+1 cooperation has maintained strong momentum, expanded and deepened, and has become more mature and ready for harvest. We should promote the 16+1 cooperation with a forward-looking and people-oriented approach, and aim to make greater contribution to the prosperity of Europe and the growth of China-Europe relations.
中国同欧盟是全面战略伙伴。中欧关系发展顺利，面临良好历史机遇。2014年，我访问欧盟总部期间，同欧盟领导人一道决定打造中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系，确立了新时期中欧合作的战略方向。双方共同决定推进的中欧共同投资基金、互联互通平台、法律事务对话、数字化合作、便利人员往来等五大平台建设取得积极进展。	
As comprehensive strategic partners, China and the EU have maintained strong relations which hold out great promise for further development. In 2014, during my visit to the EU headquarters, the EU leaders and I agreed to develop China-Europe partnerships for peace, growth, reform and progress of civilizations, identifying the strategic direction for China-Europe cooperation in the new era. Progress has been made concerning the five platforms we agreed to build, i.e. co-investment vehicle, connectivity platform, legal affairs dialogue, digital cooperation and mobility of the people.
当前，中欧双方都在推进结构性改革，促进经济社会发展。中国提出创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，致力于转方式调结构，推动经济保持中高速增长、产业迈向中高端水平。欧盟正在保持经济发展势头，实施欧洲投资计划，推出一系列组合措施。中欧作为全球两大力量、两大市场、两大文明，完全可以深度对接各自发展战略，深化利益融合，促进共同增长，为世界和平与发展作出积极贡献。	
Both China and Europe are now carrying out structural reforms to boost economic and social development. China is acting on its new vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. It is upgrading its growth model and economic structure to maintain medium-high speed of growth and move to medium and upper ends of the industrial chain. The EU is implementing the investment plan for Europe, and has rolled out a combination of policy measures to sustain the growth momentum in Europe. As the world's two major forces, two big markets and two celebrated civilizations, China and Europe have every reason to enhance synergy in their development strategies, deepen shared interests, promote common growth and contribute to world peace and development.
“16+1合作”和中欧关系发展离不开中国同地区国家双边关系发展。当前，中波关系面临良好发展机遇。贵国科学家居里夫人曾经说过：“人不要总看做过什么，而应关注还有什么要做。”我期待通过这次访问，同波兰领导人一道，加强两国各领域合作，推动“16+1合作”以及中欧关系向着更高水平、更宽领域、更深层次发展。	
The 16+1 cooperation and China-Europe relations cannot go far without the growth of bilateral ties between China and countries of this region. China-Poland relations are now facing great opportunities. Madam Curie once said, one never notices what has been done; one can only see what remains to be done. I hope that this visit will be a good occasion for me to work with Polish leaders to enhance cooperation between our two countries across the board and achieve a higher level of development and broader and deeper growth for the 16+1 cooperation and China-Europe relations.
——我们要坚持平等互信、共对时代挑战。67年来，中波两国立足本国国情，坚持走符合自身国情的发展道路，取得巨大成就。中国古代思想家孔子说“义以为质”、“信以成之”。双方应该从战略高度和长远角度看待双边关系，相互理解和支持对方的核心利益和重大关切，确保中波关系长期稳定健康发展。	
We should treat each other as equals, build up mutual trust, and jointly meet the challenges of our times. Over the past 67 years, China and Poland have made remarkable achievements along their own path of development in keeping with their national conditions. Confucius, the great philosopher in ancient China, once observed that "a gentleman upholds high principles in all his pursuits and fulfills his mission with good faith." In the same spirit, our two countries should view bilateral relations from a strategic and long-term perspective, accord each other understanding and support on issues of core interests and major concern, and ensure steady and sound growth of China-Poland relations in the coming years.
——我们要加强战略对接、共商发展大计。波兰是欧洲的“十字路口”，也是“琥珀之路”和“丝绸之路”的交汇点。目前，有多条中欧班列途经波兰或以波兰为目的地。双方应该以签署共同推进“一带一路”建设政府间谅解备忘录为基础，加紧完成两国规划纲要编制，充分梳理和筹备重大合作项目，争取早期收获。	
We should align development strategies and jointly explore ways of development. Poland is at the heartland of Europe. It is also where the Amber Road and the Silk Road meet. Several China Railway Express trains to Europe pass through Poland or are bound for Poland. Based on the MOU signed between the two governments on joint building of the Belt and Road, the two sides should speed up the formulation of cooperation plans, identify and prepare for major projects and work for early harvest.
——我们要深化务实合作、共促经济发展。波兰正在致力于再工业化，中国正在大力推进国际产能合作。中方愿同波方一道，通过产能合作参与波兰再工业化进程，深化能源、基础设施建设、交通物流、通信、航天等各领域合作，提高双边合作含金量。	
We should deepen practical cooperation and jointly boost economic development. Poland is pursuing reindustrialization, while China is seeking international cooperation on production capacity. China is ready to join the Polish reindustrialization drive through cooperation on production capacity. China is also keen to cooperate more closely with Poland in such sectors as energy, infrastructure, transportation and logistics, communications and aerospace, with a view to raising the quality and level of bilateral cooperation.
——我们要扩大人文交流、巩固传统友谊。中波两国都拥有丰富优秀的历史和文化传统。我们要互学互鉴，扩大文化、教育、地方、旅游、体育等领域交流合作，让两国青年接好中波友好的接力棒，为巩固两国传统友谊作出积极贡献。	
We must expand people-to-people ties and consolidate traditional friendship. Both China and Poland have great historical and cultural heritages. We should learn from each other and expand cooperation on culture, education, tourism, sports and at sub-national levels. We should encourage the younger generation to take the baton of friendship and do their part in deepening and renewing our traditional friendship.
——我们要用好现有平台、共谋区域合作。波兰是“16+1合作”首倡国，是首届“16+1”领导人会晤举办国，始终积极支持和参与“16+1合作”，在投资、商务等领域发挥了重要促进作用。我们愿同包括波兰在内的中东欧国家一道，用好这一区域合作平台，造福十七国人民。	
We must make good use of existing platforms and jointly promote regional cooperation. Poland was the first proponent of 16+1 cooperation and hosted the first Meeting of Heads of Government of China and Central and Eastern European countries. It has actively supported and participated in 16+1 cooperation, and has played an important role in boosting investment and commerce within this framework. We are ready to work with Poland and all other Central and Eastern European countries to make good use of the 16+1 mechanism for regional cooperation and deliver more benefits to the people of our 17 countries.
——我们要促进中欧合作、共创美好未来。中欧应该顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，深化双方战略合作，加强在国际事务中的沟通和协调，为推进以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系、打造人类命运共同体作出贡献。	
We should enhance China-Europe cooperation and create a better future together. China and Europe need to follow the trend of the times for peace, development and win-win cooperation. We should deepen strategic cooperation, increase communication and coordination on international affairs, and contribute to building a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation and a community of shared future for all mankind.
让我们携手努力，推动中波友谊航船沿着互利共赢的航道，向着中波关系、中国-中东欧国家合作、中欧关系的美好未来全速前进。	
Let us work together to set sail for a voyage of win-win cooperation and steer the vessel of China-Poland friendship at full-speed toward a brighter future for China-Poland, China-CEEC and China-Europe relations.
75. 习近平在秘鲁媒体发表署名文章《共圆百年发展梦　同谱合作新华章》
共圆百年发展梦　同谱合作新华章
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Join Hands to Fulfill Centenary Dreams and Strive for New Progress in Cooperation
By H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
应库琴斯基总统邀请，我即将来秘鲁出席亚太经合组织第二十四次领导人非正式会议并对秘鲁进行国事访问。库琴斯基总统9月访华，我11月对秘鲁进行国事访问，中秘两国元首在2个月内实现互访，将传递出新形势下中秘携手合作、共谋发展的积极信号。	
I am looking forward to coming to Peru for the 24th APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting and my state visit to this country at the invitation of President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski. President Kuczynski visited China in September. By the time of my visit, the presidents of China and Peru will have exchanged visits in less than two months. This will send a strong signal of China and Peru working together for common development.
时隔8年，秘鲁再度担任亚太经合组织会议东道主，为深化亚太合作作出了新的重要贡献。中国全力支持秘鲁办会，共同推动会议取得积极成果。	
This would be the second time for Peru to play host to the leaders of APEC economies in eight years. It marks another new and important contribution Peru makes to Asia-Pacific cooperation. Peru will have China's full support and cooperation in facilitating positive outcomes of the meeting.
上世纪90年代，我访问过秘鲁，给我留下美好印象。秘鲁山水雄奇，资源禀赋得天独厚，“南美洲脊梁”安第斯山脉纵贯南北，亚马孙河浩浩荡荡，是矿产、能源、森林、生物资源的聚宝盆。秘鲁人民勤劳勇敢，历史文化底蕴深厚，印加文明悠久灿烂，马丘比丘遗址、纳斯卡地画等古文明瑰宝令人向往，《山鹰之歌》等安第斯民歌旋律悠扬，深受世界各国人民喜爱。	
I still recall my visit to Peru in the 1990s, which left me deeply impressed by the majestic landscape and rich natural endowments of this country. The Andes Mountains, "the backbone of South America," extends from North to South, and the mighty Amazon has nourished a treasure house of minerals, fossil fuel, forests and biological resources. Peru is also known for its hard-working and courageous people, who created a time-honored history and rich culture. Its dazzling cultural heritage such as the Inca civilization, Machu Picchu and Nazca Lines are favored destinations for international visitors. El Condor Pasa and other Andean folk melodies are popular all over the world.
中秘有着传统友好关系，两国交往源远流长。早在400多年前，中国人不畏惊涛骇浪，开辟出跨越太平洋的海上丝绸之路，自此两国往来络绎不绝。近1个多世纪以来，许多中国人远赴秘鲁，在这片热土上寻觅幸福生活。他们同秘鲁人民一起辛勤劳作，为秘鲁国家建设作出积极贡献，也成为最早在秘鲁传播中华文化的友好使者。如今，拥有中国血统的秘鲁人占全国总人口近十分之一，秘鲁人民亲切地把中国人称为“老乡”，说明两国传统友好已经深深扎根在两国人民心间，这是我们两国共有的宝贵财富。	
China and Peru enjoy a long and deep friendship. Back more than 400 years ago, braving storms and waves, the Chinese people opened a maritime Silk Road across the Pacific. The Chinese and the Peruvians have been visiting each other ever since. In the past 100 years, a large number of Chinese traveled to Peru to seek a life of happiness on this promising land. They worked diligently with the local people and actively contributed to Peru's development. They were the first generation of friendship envoys who brought Chinese culture to Peru. Today, nearly one tenth of the Peruvian population descended from Chinese ancestry. The Chinese are even called by an affectionate nickname in Peru the "paisano" (old pal), showing the deep roots of friendship between our peoples. This is a valuable asset shared by our two countries.
秘鲁是最早同新中国建交的拉美国家之一。建交45年来，双方坚持相互尊重、平等相待，坚定支持对方核心利益和重大关切，积累了深厚政治互信。这奠定了中秘关系发展的重要基石。目前，两国已经建立全面战略伙伴关系，这是中国同拉美国家关系的最高水平定位，体现了双方高水平的政治互信。	
Peru was one of the first Latin American countries to establish diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China. Over the past 45 years of our diplomatic relations, we have treated each other with respect and equality, firmly supported each other on issues concerning our respective core interests and major concerns and developed strong political trust, which formed the cornerstone of China-Peru relations. Our two countries have established a comprehensive strategic partnership, the highest level of relations between China and Latin American countries, which embodies the high degree of our political mutual trust.
尽管近年来世界经济形势“寒风凛冽”，但中秘务实合作“春意盎然”。两国贸易保持增长势头。2015年，双边贸易额近150亿美元，创历史新高。今年1至8月，双边贸易额同比增长9%，其中秘鲁对华出口增长21.8%。多年来，中国一直是秘鲁第一大贸易伙伴、第一大出口市场、第一大进口来源国。秘鲁成为吸引中国投资最多的拉美国家之一，超过170家中国企业在秘鲁投资兴业，各类投资累计超过140亿美元，为秘鲁创造了上万个就业岗位，增加了政府税收，有力带动了当地经济社会发展。	
Despite the wintry state of the global economy in recent years, China and Peru are enjoying spring in their practical cooperation. Bilateral trade has remained on an upward trajectory, hitting a record level of nearly 15 billion U.S. dollars in 2015. In the first eight months of this year, trade grew by 9 percent year-on-year, outpaced by a 21.8 percent uptick in Peruvian exports to China. China has been Peru's largest trading partner, export market and source of import for years, and Peru has become one of the top destinations in Latin America for Chinese investment. Over 170 Chinese businesses have invested more than 14 billion dollars in Peru, helping to create tens of thousands of jobs and new sources of tax revenue for local communities and benefiting economic and social development in this country.
中秘人文交流十分活跃，两国人民感情好上加好、亲上加亲。双方文化、教育、科技、卫生、媒体、智库、青年、司法等领域交流合作不断增多，越来越多秘鲁民众特别是青年学生希望学习汉语、了解中华文化。秘鲁4所孔子学院注册学员超过4000名。我们欢迎更多秘鲁人到中国走一走、看一看。中国人民欣赏印加文明，越来越多中国人希望来秘鲁旅游观光。	
The robust people-to-people exchanges between Chinese and Peruvian peoples have brought them even closer to each other. Exchanges and cooperation in culture, education, science and technology, health and the judicial sector as well as between media, think tanks and youths are growing. More and more Peruvians, especially students, want to study Chinese and learn more about Chinese culture. The four Confucius Institutes in Peru have attracted more than 4,000 registered students. We welcome more Peruvians to visit China. More and more Chinese admirers of the Inca civilization are hoping to visit Peru as tourists.
中秘两国在国际和地区事务中也保持着密切沟通和协调，共同维护发展中国家整体利益。无论是在联合国改革、气候变化、可持续发展等重大国际议题上，还是在促进亚太合作、拉美一体化、中拉整体合作等地区性问题上，我们两国总是有着相同或相似立场，彼此呼应、相互支持。	
China and Peru have maintained close communication and coordination on international and regional affairs to jointly uphold the common interests of developing countries. We hold the same or similar views and have consistently echoed and supported each other's positions, be it on key international issues such as UN reform, climate change, sustainable development or regional ones like Asia-Pacific cooperation, Latin American integration and cooperation between China and Latin America.
我认为，中秘关系之所以发展蓬勃、动力强劲，得益于两国友好的牢固民意基础，得益于双方极强的经贸互补性和合作意愿，得益于两国历届政府均重视发展双边关系的正确抉择。当前，中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力，秘鲁人民也在为2021年独立200周年之际建成“公正、公平、团结的秘鲁”而不懈努力。我们梦想相同、心灵相通，深化全方位合作恰逢其时。	
I believe that the tremendous progress and strong momentum in China-Peru ties is attributable to the extensive public support for our friendship, to our enormous economic complementarity and enthusiasm toward cooperation and to the right decision of successive governments of both countries to place high importance on this relationship. The Chinese people are working vigorously to attain the two centenary goals, namely, completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the Communist Party's centenary in 2021 and building a prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious country by the centenary of the People's Republic in 2049, and the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The Peruvian people are making relentless efforts toward a just, fair and united Peru by the bicentennial of Peru's independence in 2021. Cherishing the same dream and vision, it is only natural that we should push forward all-round cooperation.
——我们要深化政治互信，在前进道路上结伴同行。双方要坚持从战略高度和长远角度看待两国关系，理解和支持对方核心利益和重大关切，确保中秘关系长期稳定发展。我多次说过，“鞋子合不合脚，只有自己知道”。中国支持秘鲁探索符合本国国情的发展道路，愿同秘方加强治国理政经验交流，在各自国家建设中取得更大成就。	
-- We need to deepen political mutual trust and remain partners for each other on the way ahead. We should continue to view our relations from a strategic and long-term perspective, understand and support each other on issues concerning core interests and major concerns and ensure the sustained and steady growth of bilateral ties. I have said on many occasions, "Only the wearer knows if the shoes fit or not." China supports Peru in exploring a development path suited to its national conditions and stands ready to enhance the sharing of experience on governance to make greater achievements in our respective development endeavors.
——我们要扩大务实合作，推动实现共同发展繁荣。中秘是天然合作伙伴，务实合作领域宽、规模大、成果多，建立了经济合作战略对话、经济贸易混合委员会等机制。双方要通过制定和实施两国共同行动计划，统筹推进下阶段务实合作。中方建议加强两国产能和投资合作，愿为秘方提供工业化所需全部装备和技术，并提供人员培训和配套融资，帮助秘鲁实现经济多元化发展，实现两国合作质量和效益双丰收。	
-- We need to expand practical cooperation and promote common development and prosperity. China and Peru are natural partners on the strength of our wide-ranging, large-scale and fruitful cooperation. We have set up mechanisms such as the strategic dialogue on economic cooperation and the joint committee on economic cooperation and trade. We need to formulate and implement a well-structured action plan to guide our practical cooperation in the years to come. China suggests that we intensify production capacity and investment cooperation. We are ready to provide Peru with all the equipment and technology it needs for industrialization, supported by personnel training and matching funds. This will be conducive to Peru's efforts toward diversified economic development, and raise the quality and efficiency of bilateral cooperation.
——我们要加强文明互鉴，夯实中秘关系民意基础。国之交在于民相亲。我们要扩大文化、教育、科技、旅游等领域交流合作，为两国人民加强往来提供更多便利。中方欢迎更多秘鲁学生来华学习，推动两国青年加强交流，让两国传统友谊薪火相传。	
-- We need to promote cultural exchange and cement public support for our relations. Amity between the people holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. We need to expand exchanges and cooperation in culture, education, science and technology and tourism and facilitate the interflow of people between our two countries. China welcomes more Peruvian students to study in China and supports more youth exchanges to pass on our traditional friendship from one generation to the next.
——我们要加强在国际和地区事务中的协作，维护共同利益。世界持久和平、持续发展进步是人类的共同心愿。中方愿同秘方一道，在重大国际和地区问题上密切沟通和配合，共同推进以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，为打造人类命运共同体和利益共同体作出贡献。	
-- We need to strengthen cooperation in international and regional affairs to uphold common interests. Lasting peace and sustained progress is the shared aspiration of all humanity. China hopes to work with Peru to maintain close communication and cooperation on major international issues, build a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation and contribute to a community of shared interests and shared future for all mankind.
中秘友好的历史接力棒已经传到我们手中。让我们携手前行、密切合作，共圆两国人民追求幸福生活的梦想，促进世界和平、稳定、繁荣！	
The baton of China-Peru friendship is now passed to us. Let us join hands and work closely together to pursue the dream of our people for a happy life and promote peace, stability and prosperity of the world.
67. 习近平在哈萨克斯坦媒体发表署名文章《为中哈关系插上梦想的翅膀》
为中哈关系插上梦想的翅膀
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
May China-Kazakhstan Relationship Fly High Toward Our Shared Aspirations
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
六月仲夏，万物繁盛。在这美好的季节，应纳扎尔巴耶夫总统邀请，我即将第三次访问哈萨克斯坦，并出席上海合作组织峰会和阿斯塔纳专项世博会开幕式。哈萨克斯坦辽阔壮美的草原、蜿蜒奔腾的河流、日新月异的建设、热情淳朴的人民给我留下深刻印象。即将再次踏上这片美丽的热土，我心中充满期待。	
In this lovely mid-summer month of June when all living things are flourishing, I will be traveling to Kazakhstan at the invitation of President Nursultan Nazarbayev. This will be my third visit to your country. I will attend the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) annual summit and the opening ceremony of Expo 2017 Astana. In this connection, I cannot but recall the fond memories of the magnificent Kazakh steppe, vibrant rivers, the phenomenal national development, and most of all, the warm-hearted and sincere Kazakh people. I very much look forward to returning to your beautiful land.
今年适逢中哈建交25周年。在这四分之一世纪里，中哈关系经受住时间和国际风云变幻考验，从建立睦邻友好关系到发展全面战略伙伴关系，再到打造利益共同体和命运共同体，实现了跨越式发展，达到历史最高水平。	
This year marks the 25th anniversary of diplomatic relations between China and Kazakhstan. Over the past quarter of a century, our bilateral relations have withstood the test of time and the ever-changing international situation. Our two countries are not only good neighbors but also comprehensive strategic partners. We are now working together to build a community of shared interests and shared future. Our bilateral relations have moved forward by leaps and bounds and become stronger and closer than ever before.
——中哈政治互信日益牢固。两国尊重对方独立、主权、领土完整和选择的发展道路，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互坚定支持，在国际和地区问题上密切协调和配合。	
- China-Kazakhstan political mutual trust has grown stronger. Our two countries respect each other's independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and choice of development path. We have firmly supported each other on issues vital to our respective core interests, and worked in close coordination and collaboration on international and regional issues.
——中哈务实合作不断加深。中国是哈萨克斯坦最主要的贸易和投资伙伴之一，累计对哈萨克斯坦投资超过428亿美元，贷款超过500亿美元。2017年1－4月，双边贸易额增长45.6%。哈萨克斯坦对华出口不断扩大，面粉、植物油、大豆、肉类、蜂蜜已经走上中国普通百姓餐桌。双方共确定51个产能合作项目，对支持哈萨克斯坦工业化进程和扩大就业具有重要意义。中哈原油管道累计对华输油1亿吨，中哈天然气管道累计对华输气1830亿立方米，双方正积极探讨核电、风电、光伏等新能源合作。每周有50多个航班往来于两国之间。2016年，中国过境哈萨克斯坦的中欧货运班列超过1200列，中哈铁路运输量达820多万吨，集装箱运量大幅增长2倍多。今年2月，哈萨克斯坦小麦首次实现过境中国向东南亚出口。	
-- China-Kazakhstan practical cooperation has deepened continuously. China ranks among Kazakhstan's top trading partners and investors. Chinese investment in Kazakhstan amounted to over 42.8 billion U.S. dollars. China's lending to Kazakhstan has exceeded 50 billion U.S. dollars on an accumulative basis. Our two-way trade of the first four months of 2017 surged by 45.6 percent. Kazakhstan's exports to China are on the rise. Kazakh wheat flour, vegetable oil, soybean, meat products and honey have made their way to the dinning table in more and more Chinese households. Our two countries have identified and agreed on 51 projects of industrial capacity cooperation which will help promote Kazakhstan's industrialization and create more jobs for the Kazakh people. Kazakhstan has exported 100 million tons of oil to China via the China-Kazakhstan crude oil pipeline, and 183 billion cubic meters of gas to my country through the natural gas pipelines. Our two countries are exploring opportunities for cooperation on new energy including nuclear, wind and photovoltaic power. There are over 50 flights between us every week. In 2016, more than 1,200 Europe-bound China Railway Express trains transited through Kazakhstan, and rail freight handled by our railways reached 8.2 million tons and the number of freight containers increased by more than two-fold. This February saw the first freight of Kazakh wheat exported to Southeast Asia via China.
——中哈人文交流更加紧密。2016年，两国人员往来近50万人次，哈萨克斯坦在华留学生1.4万人。哈萨克斯坦已开设5所孔子学院和7家孔子课堂，4所哈萨克斯坦中心落户中国高校。哈萨克斯坦歌手迪马希在中国家喻户晓，《舌尖上的中国》、《温州一家人》等中国优秀影视剧走进万千哈萨克斯坦民众家庭。	
-- China-Kazakhstan people-to-people and cultural exchanges have grown closer. In 2016, nearly 500,000 mutual visits were made between our two countries, and 14,000 Kazakh students were studying in China. Five Confucius Institutes and seven Confucius Classrooms have been set up in Kazakhstan while four Kazakhstan Centers have been inaugurated in Chinese universities. The Kazakh singer Dimash Kudaibergen is now a household name in China. Popular Chinese films or TV series, such as A Bite of China or Family On the Go, have captivated more and more Kazakh viewers.
2013年，我首次访问哈萨克斯坦期间提出建设丝绸之路经济带倡议，“一带一路”合作由此发端。4年来，共建“一带一路”逐渐从倡议转变为行动，从理念转化为实践，成为开放包容的国际合作平台和受到国际社会普遍欢迎的全球公共产品。	
It was during my first visit to Kazakhstan back in 2013 that I proposed the initiative of the Silk Road Economic Belt, which started the process of Belt and Road cooperation. Over the past four years, the Belt and Road Initiative has gradually developed from a proposal to actions, and from a concept to practice. The initiative offers an open and inclusive platform of cooperation and has become a global public good well received by the international community.
当前，国际形势深刻复杂演变，世界经济在深度调整中缓慢复苏，发展问题依然严峻，“一带一路”建设为我们创造了前所未有的历史机遇。上个月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举行，与会各方一致认为，要通过加强国际合作和对接彼此发展战略，实现优势互补，促进共同发展。	
The international situation is undergoing profound and complex changes. The world economy is slowly recovering amid deep-going readjustment. Global development remains a daunting challenge. In this context, the building of the Belt and Road brings us unprecedented historic opportunities. Last month, the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was successfully held in Beijing. The countries represented at the forum agreed to work more closely together to synergize development strategies for greater complementarity and common development.
我这次访问哈萨克斯坦的主要任务，是同纳扎尔巴耶夫总统就新形势下如何更好推进中哈全面战略伙伴关系、推动中哈全方位合作加速发展深入交换意见，作出全面部署。我们真诚希望中哈共同发展繁荣之路越走越宽，越走越顺。	
The primary task of my upcoming visit is to have in-depth discussions with President Nazarbayev on how best the two countries can advance China-Kazakhstan comprehensive strategic partnership under the new circumstances, accelerate our cooperation in all areas and come up with an overall action plan for that purpose. It is my sincere hope that China-Kazakhstan win-win cooperation for common development and prosperity will grow from strength to strength and have a brighter future.
——我们要推进共建“一带一路”合作，加快发展战略对接，共同落实“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成果。进一步释放口岸、交通、物流合作潜力，加快新亚欧大陆桥、中国－中亚－西亚经济走廊和“双西公路”项目建设，促进互联互通和贸易便利化。探索更加灵活有效的投资和融资模式，扩大双边本币结算，为中哈合作项目提供支持。	
-- We need to promote cooperation in jointly building the Belt and Road. We need to synergize our development strategies in a faster pace and work together to implement the outcomes of the Belt and Road Forum. We need to further unlock the potentials for cooperation on ports, transportation and logistics, speed up the construction of such projects as the New Eurasian Land Bridge, the China-Central and Western Asia Economic Corridor and the Western Europe-Western China Road so as to promote connectivity and trade facilitation. We should also identify investment and financing models that are more flexible and effective, and expand trade settlements in local currencies in support of our bilateral cooperation projects.
——我们要将产能合作打造成中哈合作新增长极，加快实施双方已确定的早期收获项目，继续发挥好产能和投资合作对话会机制，保持有效信息沟通和政策协调，为两国企业在对方国家发展营造良好营商环境。	
-- We need to make industrial capacity cooperation a new area of growth in China-Kazakhstan cooperation. We need to accelerate the implementation of the agreed early-harvest projects, continue to leverage the role of the existing mechanism of dialogue on investment and industrial cooperation and maintain close contact on information exchange and policy coordination in an effort to provide a sound business environment for our companies operating in each other's country.
——我们要大力发展高技术和创新合作，深化航空航天、数字经济、新能源等前沿领域合作，推动大数据、云计算、智慧城市建设，加快信息技术和电子商务领域合作，努力实现创新驱动发展，推动中哈合作向更高质量迈进。	
-- We need to vigorously promote high-tech and innovation cooperation. We need to deepen cooperation in frontier areas such as aerospace and aviation, digital economy and new energy. We also need to advance the development of big data, cloud computing and smart city, and speed up cooperation in IT industries and e-commerce. We will endeavor to bring about an innovation-driven development so as to upgrade China-Kazakhstan cooperation to a new level.
——我们要打造中哈民心相通工程，更积极推动人员交往和文化交流，通过互设文化中心、联合创办高校、交换影视文学作品等方式增进彼此了解和认同。中方鼓励更多中国公民赴哈萨克斯坦旅游观光，感受“伟大草原之国”独特魅力。	
-- We need to develop programs that help bring our people closer. We will work more actively to promote people-to-people and cultural exchanges. We should promote mutual understanding and mutual appreciation between our people through the establishment of cultural centers in each other's country, the joint operation of institutions of higher education and the exchange of films, television programs and literature works. China will encourage more visits of its citizens to Kazakhstan for tourism so that they will see for themselves the unparalleled beauty of this "Uly Dala Eli," the land of the great steppe.
——我们要深入开展安全合作，践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，依法打击“三股势力”、贩毒、跨国有组织犯罪，共同维护网络安全。加快建立共建“一带一路”双边安保机制，保障两国油气管线及大型合作项目安全，保护两国公民和企业合法权益和人身财产安全。	
-- We need to deepen our security cooperation. We will implement the vision for common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We will continue to combat terrorism, separatism and extremism, drug trafficking and transnational organized crimes according to law and jointly safeguard the cyber security. We should put in place bilateral security mechanisms for the Belt and Road cooperation to ensure the security of the oil and gas pipelines and other large cooperation projects undertaken by our two countries. We will protect the legitimate rights and interests and the personal and property safety of our citizens and companies.
——我们要密切国际和多边领域合作，加强在联合国、上海合作组织、亚信等多边框架内沟通和协调，及时就国际和地区热点问题交换意见。中方支持哈萨克斯坦作为2017－2018年联合国安理会非常任理事国在国际事务中发挥更大作用。	
-- We need to strengthen our cooperation at the international and multilateral levels. We will enhance communication and coordination under such multilateral frameworks as the United Nations (UN), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) and maintain timely exchange of views on international and regional hotspot issues. China supports Kazakhstan's greater role in international affairs in its capacity as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council for the 2017-2018 term.
我这次在哈萨克斯坦的另一项重要日程是出席上海合作组织阿斯塔纳峰会。今年是《上海合作组织宪章》签署15周年和《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》签署10周年。长期以来，成员国坚定遵循这两份重要文件确定的宗旨和原则，弘扬互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”，不断巩固互信，扎实推进各领域合作，为促进地区稳定和繁荣作出了重要贡献。	
Another important item on my agenda in Kazakhstan is to attend the SCO annual summit in Astana. This year marks the 15th anniversary of the SCO Charter and the 10th anniversary of the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation of the SCO Member States. Over the years, the SCO member states have been firmly committed to the purposes and principles enshrined in the two important documents. We have never failed to honor and promote the "Shanghai Spirit" featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diverse civilizations and pursuit of common development. As a result, the mutual trust among the SCO member states is stronger and solid progress has been made in SCO cooperation in all areas. All this has contributed significantly to regional stability and prosperity.
上海合作组织高度重视安全合作，建立了打击“三股势力”、毒品及跨国有组织犯罪的合作机制，定期举行联合反恐演习，积极推进有关热点问题解决，有效维护了地区安全和稳定。	
The SCO finds security cooperation extremely important and has put in place cooperation mechanisms on combating terrorism, separatism, extremism, drugs and transnational crimes. The member states have held joint counter-terrorism drills on a regular basis, and worked actively to address hotspot issues. All these efforts have helped to maintain regional security and stability.
上海合作组织签署和认真落实成员国多边经贸合作纲要、本组织至2025年发展战略等文件，稳步推进贸易、投资、互联互通、能源、金融、农业等领域合作，不断深化文化、教育、青年、卫生、科技、环保、旅游、体育等方面交流，为各国经济社会发展和相互友好合作提供了有益助力。	
The SCO member states have implemented in earnest the Programme of Multilateral Trade and Economic Cooperation of the SCO Member States and the Development Strategy of the SCO Until 2025, and steadily moved forward cooperation in such areas as trade, investment, connectivity, energy, finance and agriculture. The SCO has also worked actively to deepen member states' exchanges in culture, education, youth, health, science and technology, environmental protection, tourism and sports. Such endeavors have helped to boost economic and social development in the member states and enhance friendship and cooperation.
哈萨克斯坦担任上海合作组织轮值主席国以来，为推动本组织发展作出了积极贡献。在即将举行的阿斯塔纳峰会上，成员国元首将就深化各领域合作以及完成本组织首次扩员进程作出重要决定，为本组织下一步发展奠定坚实基础。中方将在本次峰会后接任轮值主席国，愿同哈方及其他成员国一道努力，以阿斯塔纳峰会为新起点，推动上海合作组织实现新发展，更好造福地区各国人民。	
As the rotating chair of the SCO, Kazakhstan has contributed significantly to the organization and its development. At the upcoming Astana summit, heads of the member states will make a number of important decisions on deepening cooperation in all fields and completing the organization's first membership expansion. These decisions will reinforce the organization's position for future development. China will succeed Kazakhstan as the rotating chair upon conclusion of this summit. China stands ready to work with Kazakhstan and other member states and build on the Astana summit to further strengthen the organization so that it will deliver more tangible benefits to people in this region.
2017阿斯塔纳专项世博会即将开幕，这是中亚国家首次举办世博会，“未来能源”主题顺应世界经济绿色、健康、可持续发展潮流，同中方打造“绿色丝绸之路”倡议高度契合。
The Expo 2017 Astana, the first of its kind in a Central Asian country, will be opening soon. Its theme "Future Energy" is very much in line with global trend toward a green, healthy and sustainable economic growth and highly compatible with China's initiative on a green Silk Road.
中方支持哈萨克斯坦将这次世博会办出特色、办出水平，中国馆将展示“人造太阳”核聚变、高铁模拟驾驶舱等最新技术，倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的生产和生活方式，为践行绿色发展理念贡献中国智慧。我预祝阿斯塔纳专项世博会取得圆满成功！	
China supports Kazakhstan in hosting a successful and distinctive Expo. The China Pavilion will showcase state-of-the-art technologies such as an "artificial minisun" using nuclear fusion and a high-speed rail cockpit simulator. Our pavilion aims to promote a green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable way of life and production, and demonstrate China's vision on green development. I wish the Astana Expo a complete success!
哈萨克斯坦独立以来，在纳扎尔巴耶夫总统卓越领导下，保持社会和谐稳定和经济快速发展，人民生活水平和幸福指数显著提高，综合国力不断增强，跻身全球竞争力50强之列，创造了“哈萨克斯坦奇迹”。	
Under President Nazarbayev's outstanding leadership, Kazakhstan has maintained social harmony and stability and achieved rapid economic growth since its independence. The Kazakh people are living better and happier lives. Thanks to the steady growth of its aggregate national strength, Kazakhstan now ranks among the world's 50 most competitive countries, creating the "Kazakhstan miracle."
当前，哈萨克斯坦正以第三次现代化为引领，加快推进“光明之路”新经济政策、“2050战略”、社会意识现代化改革，哈萨克斯坦人民正朝着实现民族振兴、国家富强的“哈萨克斯坦梦”阔步前进。中国人民也在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标和中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。共同的期盼、共同的梦想将中哈两国人民紧密连接在一起，两国人民正同心筑梦，并肩追梦，携手圆梦。	
Going all out in its third modernization drive, Kazakhstan is pressing ahead with its new economic policy of the "Nurly Zhol," the "Strategy-2050" and its social modernization. The Kazakh people are making great strides towards the "Kazakh dream" of national renewal and prosperity. The Chinese people are also making unremitting efforts to achieve the country's "two centenary goals" (i.e., to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects when the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary and turn China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious when the People's Republic of China marks its centennial) and realize the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. The Kazakh and Chinese people, closely bound by our shared aspirations, are joining hands to make their dreams a reality.
我相信，只要我们矢志笃行，中哈关系必将插上梦想的翅膀，飞向更加美好的未来！	
I do believe that as long as we stay true to our goals and work closely together, the China-Kazakhstan relations will fly high toward our shared aspirations and usher in an even better future!
64. 习近平在德国媒体发表署名文章《为了一个更加美好的世界》
为了一个更加美好的世界
To Make the World a Better Place
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
盛夏时节，我很高兴再次对德国进行国事访问，并出席二十国集团领导人汉堡峰会。
It gives me great pleasure to pay a state visit to Germany again and attend the G20 Hamburg Summit in the height of summer.
这次访问恰逢中德建交45周年。45年来，中德关系发展总体顺利，务实合作不断加深。2014年我首次对德国进行国事访问期间，双方一致同意将两国关系提升为全方位战略伙伴关系，翻开了中德关系新篇章。
My visit coincides with the 45th anniversary of diplomatic ties between China and Germany. Forty-five years on, our two countries have seen smooth progress in bilateral ties and deepened practical cooperation across the board. During my first state visit to Germany in 2014, the two sides agreed to elevate our relationship to a comprehensive strategic partnership, opening a new chapter in the history of China-Germany relations.
——中德关系战略性不断提升。两国高层互访频密，增进了相互了解、理解和政治互信。2014年双方发表《中德合作行动纲要：共塑创新》，成为指导两国关系中长期发展的纲领性文件。目前，双方已经建立包括中德政府磋商在内70多个不同层级的对话合作机制，尤其是中德外交与安全战略对话，中德高级别财金、人文、安全对话机制，中德经济顾问委员会等相继启动，充实了中德全方位战略伙伴关系的内涵。中德合作也逐渐向航空航天、海洋、极地、网络等空间延伸。
-- The strategic importance of China-Germany relationship continues to grow. Frequent exchanges of high-level visits have boosted mutual understanding and political mutual trust between our two countries. The Joint Program of Action on Cooperation: Shaping Innovation Together published in 2014 has become a master plan guiding the medium-to-long-term development of bilateral ties. The two sides have established the inter-governmental consultation as well as more than 70 other dialogue and cooperation mechanisms at various levels. In particular, the establishment of mechanisms such as the strategic dialogue on diplomacy and security, high level economic and financial dialogue, people-to-people dialogue, security dialogue and the economic advisory committee have added new dimensions to our comprehensive strategic partnership. Our cooperation has also been extended to areas such as space, ocean, the polar regions and cyberspace.
——中德务实合作成果丰硕。德国已连续42年保持中国在欧洲最大贸易伙伴地位。据德方统计，2016年，中德双边贸易额1700亿欧元，中国首次成为德国最大贸易伙伴。德国是欧洲对华技术转让最多的国家，截至2017年5月，中国从德国引进技术合同累计金额768.2亿美元。中德投资合作由“单行道”进入“双向快车道”。杜伊斯堡、汉堡等城市已成为中欧班列在欧洲的重要枢纽。中德务实合作不仅在中欧关系中发挥着重要引领作用，也成为全球最重要经济体开展互利共赢合作的典范。
-- China-Germany practical cooperation is yielding rich fruits. Germany has stayed as China's largest trading partner in Europe for 42 years in a row. According to German statistics, two-way trade reached 170 billion euros in 2016 and China became Germany's largest trading partner for the first time. Germany ranks the top among European countries in terms of technology transfer to China. As of May 2017, China signed with Germany a total of 76.82 billion dollars worth of technology transfer contracts. China-Germany investment cooperation has moved from a one-way street onto a two-way express lane. Cities such as Duisburg and Hamburg have become major hubs on the routes of China-Europe freight trains. Practical cooperation between China and Germany not only sets the pace for China-Europe relations, but also serves as a successful model of win-win cooperation between the world' s most important economies.
——中德人文交流蓬勃发展。2013年以来，两国相继举行语言年、创新伙伴年、青少年交流年等大型交流年活动。中国在德国已开设中国文化中心以及19所孔子学院、4所孔子课堂，德国歌德学院、德意志学术交流中心等在华机构也积极致力于中德人文交流。超过4万名中国学生在德国学习，是德国最大的外国留学生群体；在华德国专家多达3万人，德国留学生也达到8200人。2016年，中德人员往来超过200万人次。两国地方交流频密，目前已建立91对友好省州（市）关系。2016年11月，中德签署了多项足球合作协议，两国足球合作迈出新步伐。
-- China-Germany cultural and people-to-people exchanges are flourishing. Since 2013, the two countries have successfully held major events ranging from the language year, the year of innovation partnership to the year of youth exchange. China has set up the China Culture Center, 19 Confucius institutes and four Confucius classrooms in Germany, while German institutes in China such as the Goethe-Institut and the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst have also been actively engaged in cultural and people-to-people exchanges between the two sides. The 40,000 plus Chinese students studying in Germany make up Germany's largest group of international students, and there are over 30,000 German experts and 8,200 German students studying in China. More than two million people traveled between China and Germany in 2016. With 91 pairs of sister provinces/states and cities between us, our two countries also enjoy frequent and close exchanges at the subnational level. In November 2016, the two countries signed multiple agreements on football cooperation, marking new progress in this area.
当前，人类社会正处在一个大发展大变革大调整时代。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，人类已经成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。同时，我们也处在一个挑战频发的世界，地区热点持续动荡，恐怖主义蔓延肆虐，和平赤字、发展赤字、治理赤字是摆在全人类面前的严峻挑战。
Human society is undergoing great development, profound changes and major adjustments. The trends towards multi-polarity, economic globalization, application of information technologies in societies and cultural diversity have gained greater momentum. While mankind increasingly find ourselves in a community of shared future, we also live in a world fraught with challenges. Regional hotspots, the spread of terrorism, the deficits in peace, development and governance all pose grave challenges to the entire humanity.
中国和德国作为世界第二和第四大经济体、主要贸易大国、具有重要影响力的国家，中德两国要发展好自己，也要对世界和地区和平、稳定、繁荣肩负起重要责任。
As the world's second and fourth largest economies and key trading nations with major influence, China and Germany, while pursuing our own development, also need to shoulder important responsibility of promoting regional and international peace, stability and prosperity.
我这次访问德国的一个重要任务就是同施泰因迈尔总统、默克尔总理等德国领导人就新形势下如何抓住机遇、更好统筹推进中德全方位战略伙伴关系深入交换意见，推动中德关系在高水平上得到更大发展。
An important task of my visit is to have in-depth discussions with President Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Chancellor Angela Merkel and other German leaders on how to seize the opportunities under the new circumstances to advance our comprehensive strategic partnership in a more coordinated manner with a view to elevating China-Germany relationship to a higher level.
我们要加强对两国关系的顶层设计，以更加宽广的胸襟和开阔的视野谋划两国关系发展蓝图。发挥各层级机制性对话的引领作用，就双边关系及重大国际和地区问题加强战略沟通。通过平等对话和友好协商妥善处理分歧，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持。
We need to strengthen the top-level planning of our relations and draft the blueprint of its future growth with a more open mind and a broader vision. We need to let our dialogue mechanisms at different levels play a leading role and enhance strategic communication on bilateral relations and major international and regional issues. We need to properly handle differences through equal-footed dialogue and friendly consultation and give each other understanding and support on issues concerning our respective core interests and major concerns.
我们要以开拓创新和开放包容的思维，加强“中国制造2025”同德国的“工业4.0”战略对接。营造双向开放、公平竞争的投资环境，深化创新、互联网、智能制造、金融、能源、环保、绿色发展等领域务实合作，拓展第三方市场合作。加强两国在“一带一路”建设框架内合作，共同为沿线国家的安全、稳定、繁荣作出贡献。
We need to enhance strategic synergy between "Made in China 2025" and Germany's "Industry 4.0" with a pioneering, innovative, open and inclusive approach, foster an investment environment of two-way openness and fair competition, deepen practical cooperation in such fields as innovation, the Internet, smart manufacturing, finance, energy, environmental protection and green development, and expand cooperation in third markets. We also need to step up cooperation within the "Belt and Road" framework and jointly contribute to security, stability and prosperity of countries along the routes.
我们要发挥高级别人文交流对话机制的统筹协调作用，深化教育、文化、科技、旅游、卫生、智库、媒体、足球等领域合作，实施签证等便利化措施，拉近两国民众距离。我很高兴这次访问期间将同默克尔总理一道出席柏林动物园大熊猫馆开馆活动，希望已经抵达柏林的这对大熊猫成为中德友谊的使者。
We need to harness the coordination role of the High-Level People-to-People Exchange Dialogue Mechanism, deepen cooperation in education, culture, science and technology, tourism, health, think tanks, media, football and other fields, implement visa-related and other facilitation measures and bring our two peoples closer to each other. I am delighted that, during the visit, I will join Chancellor Angela Merkel at the opening of the Panda Garden at Zoo Berlin. I hope this pair of giant pandas who have already arrived in Berlin will serve as envoys of China-Germany friendship.
我们要加强双方在联合国、国际货币基金组织、世界贸易组织、亚洲基础设施投资银行等国际组织和机构中的相互协作和配合，共同致力于国际机制和规则的改进和完善，为维护地区稳定和世界和平、促进世界经济健康发展、推动构建人类命运共同体作出应有贡献。
We need to step up our coordination and cooperation at the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Trade Organization, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and other international organizations and institutions, commit ourselves to the betterment of international mechanisms and rules and make due contribution to upholding regional stability and world peace, promoting healthy growth of the world economy and forging a community of shared future for mankind.
去年9月，在美丽的西子湖畔，在二十国集团领导人杭州峰会上，中方同各方凝聚共识，达成一系列创新性成果，为推动世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长作出了重要贡献。
Last September, at the G20 Hangzhou Summit by the beautiful West Lake, China and other participants agreed on a number of innovative outcomes and made significant contribution to promoting strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth of the world economy.
当前，世界经济增长势头进一步巩固，发达国家和新兴市场国家经济形势普遍向好，但也面临严峻挑战。在这一背景下，二十国集团继续发挥国际经济合作主要论坛作用、落实杭州峰会及历届峰会共识、引领世界经济前进方向尤为重要，也符合各方利益。中方支持德方在汉堡举办一届成功的峰会，也对这次峰会充满期待。
Despite further consolidation of growth momentum and the upbeat economic outlook in both the developed and emerging economies, daunting challenges still persist in the world economy. Against such a backdrop, it is all the more important that the G20, as the premier forum for international economic cooperation, continues to follow through on the consensus reached at Hangzhou and all its previous Summits and lead the way forward for the world economy. This serves the interest of all parties. China has great expectations for the Hamburg Summit and supports Germany in hosting a successful meeting.
——希望二十国集团继续秉持同舟共济、合作共赢的伙伴精神。二十国集团是世界主要经济体平等对话、沟通协调的重要平台，同舟共济、合作共赢的伙伴精神是二十国集团最重要的财富。这种精神指引二十国集团走过国际金融危机风雨，也将鼓舞二十国集团引领世界经济潮流。只要各国本着彼此包容、守望相助的初心，就一定能坚定前行。
-- We look forward to a G20 that continues to uphold the spirit of partnership for win-win cooperation. For the G20, an important platform for equal-footed dialogue, communication and coordination among the world' s major economies, the spirit of partnership for win-win cooperation is its most critical asset. Such a spirit helped the G20 tide over the difficult times of the global financial crisis, and it is with this same spirit that the G20 will continue to lead the world economy forward. As long as countries stay true to our commitment to inclusiveness and mutual assistance, we will be able to forge ahead against all odds.
——希望二十国集团继续高举建设开放型世界经济的时代旗帜。经济全球化为世界经济增长提供了强劲动力，促进了商品和资本流动、科技和文明进步、各国人民交往。对于经济全球化进程中出现的问题，要妥善加以解决。二十国集团应该坚持开放发展，支持以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，推动贸易和投资继续发挥世界经济增长引擎作用。
-- We look forward to a G20 that continues to champion an open world economy. Economic globalization has provided strong impetus for world economic growth and facilitated the flow of goods and capital, progress in science, technology and civilization as well as people-to-people exchanges. That said, however, we must also address the problems that emerged in the process of economic globalization properly. The G20 needs to stay committed to open development, support the multilateral trading regime with the WTO at its heart and enable trade and investment to continue to drive global economic growth.
——希望二十国集团继续引领创新增长、长效治理的发展路径。当今世界经济增长势头来之不易，新技术、新业态带来的机遇和挑战并存。要巩固世界经济增长势头，各国就要通过创新挖掘世界经济增长新动力，综合运用财政政策、货币政策、结构性改革，促进世界经济实现强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。
-- We look forward to a G20 that continues to chart the course for innovative growth and long-term governance. The current growth momentum of the world economy has not come easily. New technologies and new forms of business have brought as many opportunities as challenges. To cement the growth momentum of the world economy, countries need to tap into new drivers of global growth through innovation, conduct fiscal and monetary policies and structural reforms in a coordinated manner, and promote strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth of the world economy.
不久前在北京成功举行的“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛，旨在加强有关国家和地区发展战略对接和互联互通，实现联动发展，同今年汉堡峰会的主题——“塑造联动世界”高度契合。“一带一路”倡议和二十国集团合作可以相互补充、相互促进。中方愿以汉堡峰会为契机，同各方一道努力，就国际经济合作和全球经济治理发出明确信号，为促进世界经济增长、完善全球经济治理作出积极贡献。
The successful Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation recently held in Beijing is aimed at stepping up the synergy of development strategies and connectivity with relevant countries and regions in an effort to achieve interconnected development. It chimes with the theme of this year's Hamburg Summit- "Shaping an Interconnected World". The Belt and Road Initiative and G20 cooperation could complement and reinforce each other. China hopes to work with all parties at the Hamburg Summit to jointly send out a clear message on international economic cooperation and global economic governance and contribute to improved global growth and economic governance.
我期待着同德方一道努力，推进中德全方位战略伙伴关系，推动汉堡峰会取得圆满成功。因为我们的目标是共同的，这就是建设一个更加美好的世界。
I look forward to working with Germany to advance the China-Germany comprehensive strategic partnership and contribute to the full success of the Hamburg Summit, for we share this common objective: to make the world a better place.
72. 习近平在瑞士媒体发表署名文章《深化务实合作 共谋和平发展》
深化务实合作 共谋和平发展
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
A Shared Commitment to Practical Cooperation and Peaceful Development
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
我很高兴2017年第一次出访就来到瑞士这个美丽的国家。这是我首次以中国国家主席身份访问瑞士，也是新世纪以来中国国家元首对瑞士进行的首次国事访问。	
I am very pleased to come to the beautiful country of Switzerland for my first overseas trip in 2017. This is the first time for me to visit Switzerland as Chinese President and the first state visit by a Chinese head of state in the new century.
瑞士著名诗人、诺贝尔文学奖获得者施皮特勒说：“找到同呼吸、共命运的朋友是人世间最大的幸福。”访问期间，我将同瑞士联邦委员会、联邦议会领导人会谈会见，同社会各界进行广泛接触和交流。我将赴达沃斯出席世界经济论坛2017年年会，并到日内瓦、洛桑访问联合国机构和国际组织总部。我对这次瑞士之行充满期待。	
The well-known Swiss poet and Nobel laureate Carl Spitteler once said that there is no greater happiness than having friends who share the same outlook and destiny with oneself. During my visit, I will have talks and meetings with leaders of the Swiss Federal Council and Federal Assembly and have extensive contact and discussion with people from various sectors. I will also attend the World Economic Forum (WEF) Annual Meeting 2017 in Davos and visit the headquarters of UN agencies and international organizations in Geneva and Lausanne. I am very much looking forward to this trip.
（一）	I
中瑞两国虽然相距遥远，但瑞士对中国人民来说并不陌生。瑞士被誉为“欧洲屋脊”和“科技创新之国”，风光秀美，人民勤劳，经济发达。	
Despite the great distance between our two countries, the Chinese people are no strangers to Switzerland. Known as the roof of Europe and a leader in innovation, Switzerland boasts beautiful landscape, hard-working people and an advanced economy.
中瑞两国交往合作源远流长。早在上世纪初，瑞士钟表、制药、纺织、机械产品就已经远销中国，瑞士金融保险机构也在华开展业务。	
The exchange and cooperation between us go back a long way. In the early 20th century, Swiss-made clocks and watches, medicine, textiles and mechanical products were already sold in China, and Swiss financial and insurance services also had presence there.
上世纪50年代，瑞士成为最早承认并同新中国建交的西方国家之一。1954年，周恩来总理率团出席日内瓦会议，向世界展示了新中国外交的风格和特色。	
In 1950, Switzerland was one of the first Western countries to recognize and establish diplomatic relations with New China. In 1954, Premier Zhou Enlai led the Chinese delegation to the Geneva Conference, unveiling to the world the diplomatic style and approach of the young People' s Republic.
中国实行改革开放之初，瑞士企业就在华设立了第一家中外合资工业企业。进入新世纪，瑞士在欧洲国家中率先承认中国完全市场经济地位。	
Shortly after China began its reform and opening-up program in the late 1970s, a Swiss company set up the first industrial joint venture in China. At the start of this century, Switzerland was among the first European countries to recognize China as a full market economy.
近年来，瑞士成为首个同中国签署并实施自由贸易协定的欧洲大陆国家。在支持人民币国际化、参与创立亚洲基础设施投资银行、互免持外交护照人员签证等方面，中瑞合作展现了与时俱进、敢为人先的创新精神，对中欧合作发挥了示范作用。	
In recent years, Switzerland became the first European continental country to conclude and implement a free trade agreement with China. Our two countries have taken pioneering and innovative steps in our engagement with each other, such as Switzerland' s support for the internationalization of the RMB, its participation in the founding of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and mutual visa exemption for diplomatic passport-holders of our two countries. These have set a good example for cooperation between China and other European countries.
中瑞关系保持高水平发展。去年4月，我同来中国进行国事访问的施奈德－阿曼联邦主席一道，宣布建立中瑞创新战略伙伴关系，这是中国首次同外国建立以创新为标志的战略伙伴关系。中瑞关系进入新的发展阶段。	
The China-Switzerland relationship is growing from strength to strength. During his state visit to China last April, President Johann Schneider-Ammann and I announced the establishment of an innovative strategic partnership between the two countries, the first of its kind for China featuring innovation. This marked a new phase of our bilateral relations.
中瑞两国是不同社会制度、不同发展阶段、不同大小国家友好合作的典范。这是因为两国人民彼此怀有友好感情，更是因为双方相互尊重各自选择的社会制度和发展道路，秉承平等相待、创新共赢的合作精神发展双边关系。	
The relations between our countries are a model of friendship and cooperation between countries that are different in size, social system and development stage. This is made possible by our people' s mutual goodwill, by a shared commitment to growing our bilateral relations on the basis of equality, innovation and win-win cooperation, and above all, by our respect for each other' s social system and development path.
在当前国际形势复杂多变、世界经济复苏乏力的背景下，中瑞携手合作，全面深化创新战略伙伴关系，可以造福两国人民、带动中欧关系发展，也可以为当今国际关系稳定发展、世界经济复苏、贸易自由化作出积极贡献。
In a complex and fast-changing world beset by weak economic recovery, China and Switzerland need to work together to deepen the innovative strategic partnership across the board. This will not only benefit our peoples and grow China-Europe relations, but also contribute to the steady progress of international relations, global recovery and fair trade.
面向未来，我们两国要在以下方面作出努力。	
Going forward, we need to deepen our engagement in the following areas:
——保持高层交往。发挥两国各层级对话和磋商机制作用，在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持。	
- Maintaining high-level exchanges. We should leverage the dialogue and consultation mechanisms at various levels and show mutual understanding and support on issues concerning each other' s core interests and major concerns.
——创新务实合作。通过建立中瑞高水平创新合作等平台，推动两国企业、高校、科研机构开展创新合作，拓展节能环保、气候变化、知识产权、金融、生态农业、社会保障等领域合作。加强在联合国等国际组织及国际事务中的协调和合作，共同致力于和平解决国际争端，为国际形势注入稳定因素。	
- Breaking new ground in practical cooperation. The newly established Sino-Swiss High-level Innovative Dialogue will enable us to promote collaboration between our companies, universities and research institutes and in energy conservation, environmental protection, climate change, IPR protection, financial services, eco-agriculture and social security. We may also increase coordination and cooperation at the UN and other multilateral organizations and in international affairs, work for the peaceful settlement of international disputes and promote stability in the world.
——加强人文交流。以签署中瑞新的文化合作协议、中国在伯尔尼建立中国文化中心、共同举办中瑞旅游年为契机，扩大两国民间和青年交流，便利两国人员往来，加强两国旅游、冬季运动、职业教育、地方交往等领域合作，巩固中瑞关系社会基础。	
- Expanding people-to-people exchanges. With the signing of the new cultural cooperation agreement, the establishment of the Chinese cultural center in Bern and the launch of the year of tourism, we are well placed to expand people-to-people and youth exchanges, facilitate personnel visits, and beef up cooperation in tourism, winter sports and vocational education and at the subnational level. All this will help cement public support for China-Switzerland relations.
——完善中瑞自由贸易区。积极探讨升级中瑞自由贸易协定，发挥其示范作用，共同维护自由开放的国际贸易和投资体系。利用亚洲基础设施投资银行、中国－中东欧国家合作等多边合作平台，助力中欧“一带一路”合作。	
- Improving our Free Trade Area. We may actively explore the possibility of upgrading the Free Trade Agreement, and set a good example of promoting the free and open international trade and investment system. We may also step up China-Europe cooperation on the Belt and Road Initiative through the AIIB and the cooperation mechanism between China and Central and Eastern European countries.
（二）	II
2016年9月，在美丽的西子湖畔，在二十国集团领导人杭州峰会上，中方同各方凝聚共识，为构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济注入了新动力。今年，我首次赴达沃斯，希望在世界经济论坛年会上同各方坦诚深入交流，增强应对挑战的信心，推动世界经济恢复增长。	
In September 2016, the G20 Hangzhou Summit took place by the picturesque West Lake. During the summit, China worked with other parties to strive for consensus and inject momentum into the efforts to build an innovative, invigorated, interconnected and inclusive world economy. As I make my first trip to Davos for the WEF annual meeting, I look forward to candid and in-depth exchanges with the participants. It is a good opportunity to boost confidence in rising to challenges and re-energize world economic growth.
瑞士达沃斯世界闻名。每逢新年伊始，来自世界不同地区、国家、领域的各界人士在此聚会，交流观点，碰撞思想，吸引着世界的目光。特别是国际金融危机爆发以来，世界经济论坛年会成为各方集思广益、对话合作的重要平台。这种同舟共济、共克时艰的精神为促进世界经济复苏发挥了积极作用。	
Davos is a well-known town. At the start of each new year, people from different regions, countries and backgrounds would come and meet here. Such a meeting of minds has always been under international spotlight. This has been especially so in the wake of the global financial crisis, when the WEF annual meetings have emerged as a major platform for brainstorming, dialogue and cooperation. Sticking together in times of difficulty, this is the very spirit that has helped to put the world economy on the path of recovery.
当前，人们普遍对世界经济发展前景感到焦虑，反经济全球化思潮、民粹主义、贸易保护主义明显上升，主张对现行发展道路、分配制度、治理模式进行反思和变革的声音增多，世界经济走向成为各方共同关心的问题。	
We meet at a time of angst about the prospects of the world economy, growing backlash against economic globalization, and rising populism and trade protectionism. There is a stronger call for revisiting and changing the current paths of development, systems of wealth distribution and models of governance. The direction of the world economy is a subject of heated discussion.
中国一直同包括欧洲国家在内的世界各国一道，探索应对全球发展面临的挑战。我们主动适应外部环境变化和中国经济发展新常态，以创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念为指引，推进供给侧结构性改革，培育增长新动能，取得积极成效。中国将继续为世界经济增长提供巨大市场空间，继续成为各国投资的热土，继续为增进各国人民福祉作出贡献。	
China has been working with European countries, among others, to address the challenges facing global development. We have taken the initiative to adapt to the fluid external environment and the "new normal" of the Chinese economy. We have followed the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, and made good progress in deepening supply-side structural reform and fostering new growth drivers. China will continue to be a huge market supporting world economic growth, a hot destination attracting foreign investment and a contributor to the well-being of people around the world.
（三）	III
日内瓦在近现代国际关系史上具有举足轻重的地位，见证了联合国及其专门机构等政府间国际组织的发展，提供了达成伊朗核、叙利亚、中东和平进程等重要热点问题阶段性协议的平台，促成了《日内瓦公约》、《全面禁止核试验条约》等一系列国际条约和法律文书的通过。	
Geneva has a prominent place in the international relations of the modern era. The city has witnessed the development of inter-governmental organizations such as the UN and its specialized agencies, served as the venue for negotiating key agreements on hotspot issues, including the Iranian nuclear issue, Syria and the Middle East peace process, and facilitated the adoption of many international treaties and legal instruments, notably the Geneva Convention and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
1971年，中国恢复在联合国合法席位并重返位于日内瓦的国际机构后，深入参与和平、安全、发展、人权、社会等各领域治理，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出了自己的贡献。中国和各国人民通过长期探索特别是在日内瓦的多边外交实践，倡导了主权平等、和平和解、法治正义、开放包容、人道主义等理念和原则。这些既体现了日内瓦多边主义精神的内涵，也是中国外交的传统。	
After regaining its lawful seat in the UN and returning to various international organizations in Geneva in 1971, China has deepened its involvement in the governance of peace, security, development, human rights and social agenda, making its due contribution to the lofty cause of peace and development. Decades of hard work, especially multilateral diplomacy practised here in Geneva, has inspired the people in China and elsewhere to establish the notions and principles of sovereign equality, peaceful reconciliation, the rule of law and justice, openness and inclusiveness, and humanitarianism. These reflect both the Geneva spirit of multilateralism and the fine tradition of Chinese diplomacy.
我这次访问联合国日内瓦总部，是想同各方重温历史，弘扬各方公认的外交理念，探索构建人类命运共同体这个重大命题，就建设一个更加美好的世界聆听各方意见。	
I will visit the United Nations Office at Geneva with the following goals in mind: reviewing our shared historical journey, championing the widely accepted principles of diplomacy, exploring ways to realize the vision of building a community of shared future for mankind, and seeking ideas on how we can make the world a better place.
世界卫生组织是负责卫生事务的联合国专门机构，为完善全球卫生治理、维护世界人民健康作出了重要贡献。卫生既是中国发展的重要方面，又是中国对外合作的重点领域。中国同世界卫生组织的合作，提升了中国卫生与健康事业水平，也对全球卫生事业作出了贡献。我期待着同陈冯富珍总干事就中国同世界卫生组织合作充分交换意见。	
The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized UN agency dedicated to global health issues. It has done its best to improve global health governance and safeguard the well-being of all people. Health is a high priority on China' s development agenda and a key area of its international cooperation. Cooperation with the WHO has helped to improve China' s national health programs and represents a contribution to global health endeavors. I look forward to an extensive discussion with Director General Margaret Chan on this subject.
国际奥林匹克运动走过了100多年的历程，对实现人的全面发展，增进各国人民友谊，推动世界和平、发展、进步事业发挥了积极作用。中国始终是奥林匹克运动的积极支持者和参与者，举办了2008年北京奥运会、残奥会和2014年南京青奥会，正在积极筹办2022年北京冬奥会、冬残奥会。我很高兴有机会访问国际奥委会，听取巴赫主席和国际奥委会关于弘扬奥林匹克精神、推进奥林匹克运动的意见。	
The International Olympic Movement, in its over 100 years, has played a positive role in enhancing all-round human development, deepening friendship between nations and promoting peace, development and progress. China, a long-time supporter and member of the Olympic Movement, has hosted the Beijing 2008 Olympic and Paralympic Games and the Nanjing 2014 Youth Olympic Games, and is actively preparing for the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. I am glad to visit the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and learn from President Thomas Bach and the IOC their ideas about promoting the Olympic spirit and advancing the Olympic Movement.
我期待着在瑞士同各方人士共商合作、共议创新，推动中瑞关系、中欧关系、中国同联合国的关系、中国同奥林匹克运动的关系在新的一年迎来更好发展。	
In short, I look forward to my upcoming trip to Switzerland, where I will meet people from different walks of life to promote cooperation and innovation. Hopefully, the trip will give a strong impetus to China' s relations with Switzerland, Europe, the UN and the Olympic Movement in the year ahead.
60. 习近平在老挝媒体发表署名文章《携手打造中老具有战略意义的命运共同体》
携手打造中老具有战略意义的命运共同体
中共中央总书记、中华人民共和国主席
习近平
China and Laos: Working Together for a Community of Shared Future with Strategic Significance
Xi Jinping
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and President of the People's Republic of China
应老挝人民革命党中央委员会总书记、国家主席本扬·沃拉吉邀请，我即将对老挝人民民主共和国进行国事访问。我曾两次到访老挝，热情友善的老挝人民、金碧辉煌的万象塔銮、风光旖旎的湄公河畔给我留下深刻而美好的印象。我期待同老挝的新老朋友们畅叙友谊，共谋发展，共辟两国关系美好未来。	
At the invitation of Bounnhang Vorachit, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and President of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, I will soon pay a state visit to the Lao PDR. I visited Laos twice, and was deeply impressed by its hospitable people, the golden Pha That Luang, and the beautiful scenery along the Mekong River. I look forward to renewing friendship and working with old and new friends in Laos to map out plans and open a bright new future for China-Laos relations.
中老是理想信念相通、社会制度相同、发展道路相近的社会主义友邦。建交半个多世纪以来，两党两国关系经受住了时代变迁和国际风云变幻的考验，书写了动人的佳话。毛泽东、周恩来和凯山·丰威汉等两国老一辈领导人肝胆相照，结下了深厚战斗情谊，为中老世代友好奠定了坚实基础。老挝重要领导人贵宁·奔舍那的后人曾在中国求学多年，他们在中国留下了青春的足迹，也成为中老传统友谊的见证者、传承者、推动者。上世纪六七十年代，中国军民积极支援老挝民族独立和解放事业，200多位中国烈士长眠于这片他们战斗过的热土，用生命筑起了中老友好永不磨灭的丰碑。	
China and Laos are friendly socialist neighbors with shared ideals, the same social systems and similar paths of development. Over the past half a century since the establishment of diplomatic ties, the relations between the two parties and the two countries have withstood the test of time and the changing global environment, leaving behind many touching stories. Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, Kaysone Phomvihane, and other leaders of the elder generation forged among them a deep friendship based on a genuine meeting of minds, and laid down a solid foundation for lasting friendship between the two countries. The descendants of Quinim Pholsena studied for many years in China. They spent their youth in China, and became witnesses, supporters and members of new advocates for China-Laos traditional friendship. In the 1960s and 1970s, Chinese soldiers and civilians actively supported the national independence and liberation movement of Laos. Over 200 of them laid down their lives on this land, forging an indelible monument of China-Laos friendship with their flesh and blood.
进入新时期，中老友好历久弥坚，焕发出新的蓬勃生机。两国全面战略合作伙伴关系不断拓展。高层往来日益密切，党际交流持续深化，政治互信愈加稳固。中国有句古话，“同门曰朋，同志曰友”，这是中老关系的真实写照。作为志同道合的好邻居、好朋友、好同志、好伙伴，中老在探索社会主义理论和实践创新，全面推进经济、政治、文化、社会等各方面建设，加快推进现代化的进程中始终平等相待，相互扶持。中老关系堪称中国同周边国家睦邻友好、全面合作的典范。	
In recent years, China-Laos friendship has been further cemented and is showing fresh vitality. The comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership between the two countries has been expanding. Frequent high-level contacts and deepening inter-party exchanges have solidified our political mutual trust. The Chinese people believe that friends are those who follow the same cause and are inspired by the same vision. This is a vivid characterization of China-Laos relationship. As good neighbors, good friends, good comrades and good partners with the same vision, China and Laos have always treated each other as equals and supported each other in exploring innovation in socialist theories and practice, in fully advancing economic, political, cultural and social development, and in accelerating modernization. China-Laos relationship sets an example of good neighborliness and all-round cooperation between China and its neighbors.
中老发展战略对接加速。中国提出的“一带一路”倡议同老挝“变陆锁国为陆联国”战略、中国的“十三五”规划同老挝社会发展“八五”规划高度契合，两国发展理念相似。去年，两国务实合作旗舰项目——中老铁路全线开工，承载着老挝人民发展梦想的交通大动脉正逐步变为现实。磨憨－磨丁经济合作区和万象赛色塔综合开发区建设进展喜人，多家企业和机构签约入驻，将助力老挝实现产业升级、吸引外资、促进就业、带动中小企业发展。	
China and Laos have worked expeditiously to align their development strategies. Thanks to our similar visions for development, there is a high degree of complementarity between China's Belt and Road Initiative and the strategy of Laos to transform itself from a landlocked to a land-linked country, and between China's 13th Five-Year Plan and the 8th Five-Year National Socio-economic Development Plan of Laos. Last year, all-round construction started on the China-Laos railway, a flagship project of our practical cooperation. The transportation artery that will drive the development of Laos is a dream coming true. Good progress was made in the Mohan-Boten Economic Cooperation Zone and the Saysettha Development Zone, which have already seen a number of companies and institutions move in. This will help Laos upgrade its industries, attract FDI, create jobs and boost the growth of its SMEs.
中老务实合作驶入快车道。中国已经成为老挝第一大投资国、第二大贸易伙伴。今年1月至9月，双边贸易额21亿美元、同比增长25.1%。中国对老挝直接投资累计超过61亿美元，带动当地水电、矿产、服务贸易等行业发展。中国积极推动医院、公路、学校等一批民生援助项目落地，助力老挝人民提高生活水平和质量。中国企业承建的南累克水电站运行良好，为老挝经济建设和社会发展发挥了重要作用。老挝对华出口不断扩大，老挝大米、咖啡、香蕉、西瓜等农产品日益受到中国消费者喜爱。	
China-Laos practical cooperation has entered a period of fast development. China has become the largest investor and second largest trading partner of Laos. Bilateral trade reached 2.1 billion U.S. dollars in the first nine months of this year, up by 25.1 percent. China's total direct investment in Laos exceeded 6.1 billion U.S. dollars, facilitating the development of hydroelectricity, mining, services trade and other sectors of the local economy. China has been actively involved in delivering a number of assistance projects relating to people's livelihood, including hospitals, roads and schools, contributing to higher living standards and more convenience for the Laotian people. The Nam Leuk hydropower station undertaken by Chinese companies is operating well, and playing an important role in the economic and social development of Laos. Export from Laos to China also expanded, and the Laotian agricultural products including rice, coffee, banana and water melon are increasingly popular among Chinese consumers.
中老人文交流日益活跃。今年上半年，40万中国游客赴老挝旅游观光。越来越多的老挝人赴华经商、旅游，获得中国政府奖学金的老挝在华留学生人数居东盟各国之首。中国“和平列车”、“湄公河光明行”医疗服务活动赢得老挝人民广泛赞誉。中国上海近百名青年志愿者先后赴老挝从事网络技术、体育教学等工作，其中一名志愿者就任老挝国家男篮主教练。中老合拍的纪录片《光阴的故事》网络总播放量达数百万次，深深撼动两国民众心灵。一首由老挝友人创作并演唱的摇滚歌曲《一带一路》在网络热播，赢得大量网友点赞评论。	
China-Laos people-to-people and cultural exchanges have become more dynamic. 400,000 Chinese tourists traveled to Laos in the first half of the year. More and more people from Laos are traveling to China for business or as tourists. The number of Lao students studying in China under Chinese government scholarship tops all ASEAN countries. Chinese medical services initiatives including Peace Train and Mekong Bright Action were widely acclaimed by the Lao people. Nearly 100 young volunteers from Shanghai went to Laos to teach Internet technology and sports, and one of them became the head coach of the Lao national men's basketball team. The Story of Times, a documentary co-produced by China and Laos, was viewed several million times on the Internet, and deeply touched the hearts of our two peoples. The pop music video "Yi Dai Yi Lu" (Belt and Road), written and performed by a Lao musician, went viral on the Internet in China and received a huge number of likes and comments.
在建设有本国特色社会主义的伟大征程中，中老两国“志同而气和”。上个月，中国共产党成功召开第十九次全国代表大会。这次大会制定了中国党和国家未来发展的总体方针和行动纲领。大会绘制了从现在到本世纪中叶中国建设发展的宏伟蓝图。到2020年，将全面建成小康社会；从2020年到2035年，基本实现社会主义现代化；从2035年到本世纪中叶，把中国建设成为富强民主文明和谐美丽的社会主义现代化强国。我们有能力、有信心带领中国人民朝着实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦迈进。在老挝人民革命党领导下，老挝社会和谐稳定，经济蓬勃发展，国家日新月异，正向着老挝党第十次全国代表大会确定的目标推进全面革新事业。同样的使命，共同的梦想，恰似纵贯中老的澜沧江－湄公河水，把我们的前途牢牢相系，将我们的命运紧紧相连。
China and Laos are friends and comrades who have a shared mission in advancing the great cause of building socialism with our respective characteristics. Last month, the Communist Party of China successfully convened its 19th National Congress and set forth general principles and guidelines for the future development of the Party and the country. The Party Congress laid out the blueprint for China's development all through to the middle of the century: we will complete the building of a moderately prosperous society by 2020, basically realize socialist modernization by 2035, and build China into a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious and beautiful by the middle of this century. We have the ability and confidence to rally the Chinese people toward the realization of the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation. Under the leadership of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party, Laos enjoys social harmony and economic prosperity. It is making fast progress and steadily advancing comprehensive reforms in line with the goals set at the 10th Congress of the Party. Like Lancang-Mekong River that runs through our two countries, the common mission and ideals that bind us together have forged a common destiny for us.
——我们要加强战略沟通，打造互尊互信的命运共同体。中老双方要继承和发扬两国友好传统，牢牢把握双边关系发展的正确方向，深化政治互信，借鉴彼此推进改革、探索社会主义建设的理论和实践经验，密切政党、政府、立法机构、地方交往，拓展中老全面战略合作伙伴关系的广度和深度。两国应该在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切的问题上继续相互支持，根据事情的是非曲直确定外交政策，共同维护发展中国家权益。	
-- We need to strengthen strategic communication and build a community of shared future based on mutual respect and mutual trust. The two sides should take forward our traditional friendship, keep the bilateral relations on the right track, and deepen political mutual trust. We should learn from each other's experience, including theories and practices of reform and socialist construction, and increase exchanges between our political parties, governments, legislatures, and provinces/cities to broaden and deepen our comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership. We should continue to support each other on issues involving each other's core interests and major concerns, and make foreign policy decisions based on the merits of matters to jointly uphold the rights and interests of developing countries.
——我们要深化战略对接，打造互帮互助的命运共同体。中国支持老挝发挥独特区位优势，实现绿色可持续发展。中老铁路作为泛亚铁路网的重要组成部分，对老挝具有重大战略和现实意义。双方要加强统筹协调，争取早日建成通车，让老挝同周边国家乃至世界互联互通。我们要推进经济合作区、卫星、水电站等重大项目建设和运营，让老挝人民多受益、早受益。	
-- We need to enhance the complementarity of our development strategies and build a community of shared future through mutual assistance. China supports Laos in leveraging its geographical position to achieve green and sustainable development. As an important part of the Trans-Asian Railway network, China-Laos railway is of major strategic and practical importance to Laos. The two sides should increase coordination and work for early completion and operation of the project to connect Laos with its neighbors and the world. We must advance construction and operation of major projects, such as economic cooperation zones, satellite, and hydropower stations to bring more benefits to the Lao people as early as possible.
——我们要拓展务实合作，打造互惠互利的命运共同体。中老两国山水相连、经济互补。老挝自然禀赋优越，经济快速发展，正处在推进工业化、现代化进程的关键阶段。中国在资金、技术、装备等方面拥有丰富经验和优势。双方要不断挖掘合作潜力，创新合作模式，拓展在电力互联互通、金融、能源等领域务实合作，促进老挝农业、水利、交通、通信等基础设施建设，给两国人民带来实实在在的好处。	
-- We need to expand practical cooperation and build a community of shared future for mutual benefit. China and Laos are close neighbors with economic complementarity. Laos enjoys good natural endowments and fast economic development. The country is at a crucial stage of industrialization and modernization. China has rich experience and strength in capital, technology and equipment. The two sides should tap cooperation potential and explore new ways of cooperation. We could expand practical cooperation in electricity connectivity, finance and energy, promote the development of Lao infrastructure for agriculture, water conservancy, transportation and telecommunication, and bring real benefits to the two peoples.
——我们要扩大人文交流，打造互学互鉴的命运共同体。我们要加强文化、科技、青年、地方等领域交流合作，让中老友好薪火相传。欢迎更多的老挝朋友到中国留学、旅游、工作，成为继承和发扬中老传统友谊的使者。中国将积极支持老挝举办2018旅游年，鼓励更多中国游客来到老挝观光旅游，感受老挝历史文化的独特魅力。	
-- We need to increase people-to-people exchange and build a community of shared future featuring mutual learning. We should strengthen exchanges and cooperation in the fields of culture, science and technology and youth and subnational interactions to take China-Laos friendship from generation to generation. We welcome more Lao people to China to study, tour or work and to serve as envoys for the traditional friendship between our two countries. China will support Laos in hosting the 2018 Tourism Year, encourage more Chinese tourists to visit Laos and experience the unique charm of Lao history and culture.
中老同为澜沧江－湄公河合作机制重要成员。澜湄合作机制自2016年正式启动以来取得了丰硕成果，体现了“澜湄速度”和“澜湄效率”，培育了平等相待、真诚互助、亲如一家的澜湄文化。老挝明年将担任澜湄合作共同主席国。中国愿同老挝一道努力，推动澜湄合作取得更多成果，落实老方提出的早期收获项目，带动次区域发展，为地区国家人民带来更多福祉。	
China and Laos are both important members of the Lancang-Mekong Cooperation (LMC) framework. The LMC has achieved fruitful results since its inception in 2016. It has demonstrated a Lancang-Mekong speed and efficiency, and fostered a Lancang-Mekong culture of equality, sincerity, mutual assistance and affinity. Laos will be the LMC Co-Chair next year. China will work with Laos to facilitate more cooperation outcomes, implement the early-harvest projects proposed by Laos, promote sub-regional development and bring more benefits to countries and peoples in the region.
老挝人常说“一根柴棍烧不成旺火，一根木棍围不成篱笆”，中国人讲“众志成城”、“众人拾柴火焰高”。我坚信，只要中老彼此信任，携手合作，必将开创两国关系更加美好的明天。	
As a Lao saying goes, one piece of firewood does not make high flames, and a single wood stick does not make a fence. The Chinese believe that people, if united, are as strong as a fortress, and flame runs high if everyone adds wood to it. I am convinced that as long as our two countries trust each other and work together, we will create an even better future for our bilateral relations.
69. 习近平在芬兰媒体发表署名文章《穿越历史的友谊》
穿越历史的友谊
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Our Enduring Friendship
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
4月，草木初萌，春意渐浓。在这个美好的季节里，受尼尼斯托总统邀请，我即将对芬兰进行国事访问，感到十分高兴。
At the invitation of President Sauli Niinisto, I am delighted to pay a state visit to Finland in this beautiful spring season of budding plants and blooming flowers.
我曾经两次到访芬兰，这里纯净秀丽的林湖风光、勤勉创新的发展理念、淳厚安宁的人文风情，给我留下美好印象。芬兰地处东西方文明交汇前沿，数百年来，芬兰人民在历史激荡中奋勇前行，发扬坚韧不拔的“西苏”精神，取得民族独立、国家富强的伟大成就。这里孕育了交响乐大师西贝柳斯，研发出享誉世界的Linux操作系统，并发展成全球幸福和清廉指数最高的国家之一。	
I have been to Finland twice before. Your scenic and unspoiled lakes and forests, your development philosophy that values diligence and innovation, and your kind and honest people all left me fond memories. Finland lies at the crossroads of Eastern and Western civilizations.Throughout the centuries, the Finns, with their "sisu" spirit, have forged ahead despite many vicissitudes and made remarkable achievements in national independence and prosperity. This country is home to the great composer Jean Sibelius and the well-regarded Linux operating system. It also has one of the highest rankings on the World Happiness Index and the Corruption Perceptions Index.
今年适逢芬兰独立百年纪念，我很高兴同芬兰人民分享喜悦之情。中国和芬兰在近代历史上有着相似经历，对芬兰的民族自豪感有着强烈共鸣。	
As this year marks the centenary of Finland's independence, it is indeed a pleasure for me to share the joy of the Finnish people on this occasion. Due to similar experiences in our modern history, the Finnish sense of national pride has strong resonance among the Chinese people.
中芬两国彼此怀有友好感情。芬兰是最早同新中国建交的西方国家之一，是第一个同中国签订政府间贸易协定的西方国家。1952年，芬兰作为东道国，邀请中国参加第十五届赫尔辛基奥运会，五星红旗第一次在奥林匹克运动赛场上升起。上世纪70年代，芬兰是少数积极支持中国恢复联合国合法席位的西方国家。2008年中国四川汶川遭遇特大地震灾害，芬兰红十字会紧急捐助近20吨物资，芬兰航空公司免费协助运输各国捐助的救灾帐篷。多家芬兰企业在中国市场取得了巨大成功，中芬经贸、科技合作实现互利共赢。中国长期在国际事务上同芬兰保持密切合作，支持芬兰在国际事务中发挥更大作用，为世界和平与发展作出贡献。	
China and Finland have a close bond. Finland is one of the first Western countries to establish diplomatic ties with the People's Republic of China and the first Western country to sign an intergovernmental trade agreement with China. In 1952, Finland invited China to participate in the 15th Summer Olympic Games in Helsinki, marking the first time that the national flag of the People's Republic was raised at the Games. In the early 1970s, Finland is one of the few Western countries that actively supported the restoration of China's lawful seat at the United Nations. Following the devastating earthquake in Wenchuan, Sichuan Province in 2008, the Finnish Red Cross donated nearly 20 tons of emergency supplies and Finnair provided free shipping for tents donated by various countries. Many Finnish companies have had great success in China, pointing to the win-win nature of our economic, scientific and technological cooperation. For decades, China has maintained close cooperation with Finland on international affairs, and has supported Finland in playing a bigger role in the world and contributing more to global peace and development.
两国人民的深厚感情为双边关系发展奠定了坚实基础，中芬关系经受住时间和国际风云变幻考验，成为不同幅员、不同文化、不同发展水平国家和平共处、友好交往的典范。当前，中芬两国正在积极构建面向未来的新型合作伙伴关系，两国关系面临良好发展机遇。中国始终从战略高度和长远角度看待中芬关系，坚持相互尊重、平等相待，通过互利合作谋求共同发展。	
Thanks to the reservoir of goodwill, the China-Finland relationship has been able to grow on a solid foundation. Passing the test of time and international changes, it sets an example for peaceful co-existence and friendly exchanges between two countries that are different in size, culture and development level. At present, China and Finland are working to build a future-oriented new-type cooperative partnership. This provides tremendous opportunities for expanding our relationship. China has all along approached our ties from a strategic and long-term perspective and pursued common development on the basis of win-win cooperation, equality and mutual respect.
中芬经济优势互补，合作互利共赢的特点突出。中国连续14年成为芬兰在亚洲最大贸易伙伴，双方双向投资增长强劲。中国推进“十三五”规划同芬兰实施“2025发展愿景”多有契合，双方在创新创业、清洁能源、生物经济、北极科研等领域务实合作将呈现更多新亮点。中方正在积极推进“一带一路”建设，欢迎芬方积极参与。	
With highly complementary economies, China-Finland cooperation has delivered clear benefits to both sides. China has remained Finland's largest trading partner in Asia for the past 14 years. Two-way investment is growing rapidly. China's 13th Five-Year Plan dovetails with Vision: Finland 2025, promising exciting cooperation in such areas as innovation, entrepreneurship, clean energy, bio-economy and arctic research, to name just a few. Last but not least, Finland is welcome to take an active part in China's land and maritime Silk Road initiative.
中芬人员往来密切，人文交流蓬勃发展。中国游客赴芬兰观赏北极光、探访圣诞老人的人数持续增加。“欢乐春节”庙会活动已在芬兰连续举办11年，成为许多芬兰朋友在隆冬期待的品牌活动。赫尔辛基艺术节中国主宾国活动和在北京举办的“你好，赫尔辛基”文化活动受到两国人民欢迎。中国将于2022年举办冬季奥运会，芬兰是世界冰雪运动强国，双方合作大有可为。	
Our two countries also enjoy vibrant people-to-people ties. There is a steady rise in the number of Chinese visiting Finland for the Northern Lights and Santa Claus. The annual "Happy Spring Festival" fair, held in Finland for the past 11 years, has become a popular winter event anticipated by many Finns. The Helsinki Art Festival with China as the guest of honor and "Moi, Helsinki" cultural event in Beijing have been well received among the local communities. With Finland doing so well in winter sports and China hosting the Winter Olympics in 2022, there is much we can do together in this area.
这次访问是我担任中国国家主席后首次访问北欧地区。北欧经济发达、创新活跃，中国和北欧国家有着良好双边关系和真诚合作意愿，双方各领域交流合作稳步扩大。次区域合作是中欧关系有益补充，相信中国同北欧的密切联系将为促进欧洲繁荣和中欧关系发展作出贡献。	
This visit will be my first to the Nordic region as President of China. Nordic countries have advanced economies and strong innovation capacity. China and Nordic countries enjoy good relations and share a sincere desire for cooperation. Our exchanges and cooperation in various fields are blossoming. Sub-regional cooperation is a useful complement to China-Europe relations. I am sure that the close ties between China and Nordic countries will be a contributing factor to European prosperity and China-Europe relations.
当前，欧洲形势正在发生深刻复杂变化。我们认为，欧洲一体化顺应历史发展潮流，欧洲繁荣稳定有利于世界和平发展大势，相信欧洲有智慧、有能力克服挑战。在这一过程中，中国是欧洲值得信赖的伙伴。	
At the moment, Europe is undergoing profound and complex changes. China is of the view that European integration is consistent with the trend of history, and a prosperous and stable Europe is conducive to world peace and development. We believe that Europe has the wisdom and capability to overcome the challenges. In this process, Europe can count on China's support.
中国和欧盟是世界上两支重要力量。当前，中欧全面战略伙伴关系发展日趋成熟深入，和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系全面推进，中欧共同投资基金、互联互通等五大平台建设取得积极进展。中欧双方都在推进结构性改革，促进经济社会发展。双方对接各自发展战略、加强利益融合，对促进中欧共同增长具有重要意义。中欧双方要坚持开放包容的共同理念，为促进世界和平和繁荣作出新贡献。	
China and the EU have important roles to play in the world. The China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership is deepening and maturing, and the partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization are advancing in all respects. We are making good progress in the building of the five agreed platforms, including the China-EU mutual investment fund and the China-EU connectivity platform. Both China and European countries are pursuing structural reform for greater economic and social development. It is of vital importance for the common growth of China and Europe that we synergize our development strategies and expand our common interests. Indeed, we have a shared responsibility to uphold openness and inclusiveness and make new contributions to global peace and prosperity.
新的历史篇章，需要各国人民共同书写。中芬两国人民要携手合作，同各国人民一道，努力创造人类更加幸福美好的明天！	
A new chapter of history is being written by people of the world. The Chinese people wish to join hands with the Finnish people and others to create a better future for mankind.
62. 习近平在越南媒体发表署名文章《开创中越友好新局面》
开创中越友好新局面
For a New Vista in China-Vietnam Friendship
中共中央总书记、中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and President of the People's Republic of China
应越共中央总书记阮富仲和国家主席陈大光邀请，我即将对越南社会主义共和国进行国事访问。这是我在2015年年底访问越南后，再次踏上这片美丽的土地，感到十分亲切。
At the invitation of General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) Nguyen Phu Trong and President of Vietnam Tran Dai Quang, I will soon pay a state visit to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Warm feelings well up inside of me as I am about to be back in this beautiful country after my visit at the end of 2015.
中越是山水相连、唇齿相依的邻邦。两国人民毗邻而居，自古便有互通互鉴之情。
China and Vietnam are very close neighbors connected by mountains and rivers. Our peoples have engaged in exchange and mutual learning since ancient times.
近代以来，在争取国家独立和民族解放的斗争中，两国人民并肩战斗、彼此支援，结下了“同志加兄弟”的特殊情谊。胡志明主席在中国开展革命的时间前后长达12年，同毛泽东主席、周恩来总理等中国领导人情同手足。越南著名将领洪水积极投身中国革命，参加红军25000里长征，成为新中国授衔的唯一一位外籍军官，也是世界上少有的“两国将军”。中国人民也为越南民族解放斗争提供无私帮助，毛泽东主席曾表示“7亿中国人民是越南人民的坚强后盾，辽阔的中国领土是越南人民的可靠后方”。中国赴越南军事顾问团首任炮兵顾问窦金波，在接到帮助越南同志的任务后，将刚降生的女儿起名为“越华”。忆峥嵘岁月，两党两国老一辈领导人亲手缔造、两国人民用鲜血凝成的情谊值得我们永远铭记和珍惜。
In the struggle for independence and liberation in modern times, our peoples fought shoulder to shoulder, and forged a special bond of "camaraderie + brotherhood." Chairman Ho Chi Minh spent 12 long years in China for revolutionary activities. He was like a brother for Chairman Mao Zedong, Premier Zhou Enlai and other Chinese leaders. General Nguyen Son devoted himself to the Chinese revolution and traversed the Long March with the Chinese Red Army. He became the only foreign military officer commissioned in New China and a rare "general of two countries." The Chinese people also provided selfless help to Vietnam in its fight for national liberation. Chairman Mao once said that "The seven hundred million Chinese people are the strong supporters of the Vietnamese people, and the vast Chinese territory is the reliable rear area." Dou Jinbo, the first artillery adviser of the Chinese military advisory group to Vietnam, named his newborn daughter "Yue Hua," meaning "Vietnam and China" upon learning of his mission in Vietnam. This friendship forged with blood by the older generation of leaders of our two parties, countries and peoples in those tumultuous years must be remembered and cherished forever.
进入新时期，在推进改革和革新以及社会主义建设事业中，两国人民相互借鉴、携手并进。我们共同探索符合本国国情的社会主义发展道路，创造出各自的发展奇迹，也推动两国关系得到长足发展。两国政治互信日益牢固，高层往来更加频密。我这次访问是两党两国最高领导人时隔两年后再度实现年内互访。两国务实合作深入拓展。中国连续13年保持越南第一大贸易伙伴地位，越南成为东盟国家中中国最大贸易伙伴，2016年双边贸易额近1000亿美元。越来越多的中国企业到越南投资兴业。天虹集团在越南经营十几年，在北宁省兴建的工厂为当地创造了7000多个就业岗位，也是省内纳税大户。以中国民营企业为主的投资商在前江省创建的龙江工业园，已有30多家企业入驻。两国人文交流更加密切。中国是越南第一大外国游客来源地，岘港、芽庄等旅游城市随处可见中国游客。每周往返于两国之间的客运航班有300多趟。中国的《三国演义》《水浒传》等经典名著在越南备受推崇，当代影视作品也深受越南民众喜爱。越南歌手杜氏清花还在中国中央电视台《星光大道》节目中获得月度冠军。更难能可贵的是，两国通过友好协商解决了陆地和北部湾划界问题，妥善处理并管控分歧，为两国共同发展和地区和平稳定创造了有利条件。这些都是对中越全面战略合作伙伴关系精神内核和丰富内涵的最好诠释。
In the new era, our two peoples have worked closely to pursue reform and renewal, and advance the cause of socialism. We have explored socialist development paths suited to our own national conditions, created miracles in our respective development, and achieved marked progress in our bilateral ties. The two countries now enjoy deeper political mutual trust and closer high-level exchange. With my visit this time, the top leaders of our two parties and countries will have had mutual visits within a single year twice in just three years. The two countries have deepened and broadened practical cooperation. China has been Vietnam's biggest trading partner for 13 years in a row, and Vietnam has become China's biggest trading partner among ASEAN countries. Bilateral trade in 2016 reached nearly 100 billion U.S. dollars. More and more Chinese companies are investing in Vietnam. For example, as a Chinese company running in Vietnam for over 10 years, the Texhong Textile Group has created over 7,000 jobs in Bac Ninh through the plant it opened locally and contributed significantly to local tax revenues. The Long Jiang Industrial Park in Tien Giang, established mainly by private Chinese investors, now hosts over 30 companies. The two countries have increased people-to-people exchange. China has been Vietnam's largest source of foreign tourists, for whom Da Nang and Nha Trang are among the most popular destinations. There are over 300 passenger flights between the two countries every week. Both Chinese literature classics such as The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, The Water Margin and contemporary Chinese movies and TV series have a large fan base in Viet Nam. Do Thi Thanh Hoa, a singer from Viet Nam, won the monthly championship at the "Avenue of Stars," a popular singing competition show on the China Central Television. More importantly, our two countries have, through friendly consultations, delimited the boundaries on land and in the Beibu Gulf and properly managed differences, creating favorable conditions for the common development of the two countries and for regional peace and stability. All the above examples best illustrate the underlying significance and rich implications of the comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership between China and Vietnam.
当前，两国都走在改革发展的新征程上，朝着各自的宏伟目标奋勇前进。上个月，中国共产党成功召开第十九次全国代表大会。这次大会制定了中国党和国家未来发展的总体方针和行动纲领。大会绘制了从现在到本世纪中叶中国建设发展的宏伟蓝图。到2020年，将全面建成小康社会；从2020年到2035年，基本实现社会主义现代化；从2035年到本世纪中叶，把中国建设成为富强民主文明和谐美丽的社会主义现代化强国。我们有能力、有信心带领中国人民朝着实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦迈进。越南也正按照越共十二大确定的方针，全面推进革新事业，朝着早日建成民富国强、民主、公平、文明的现代化工业国目标迈进。我们比以往任何时候都需要携手合作，共同追寻强国富民梦。
Today, the two countries have both embarked on a new journey of reform and development, forging ahead toward our respective ambitious goals. The Communist Party of China successfully held its 19th National Congress last month. Overall guidelines and program of action were set out for the future development of the party and the country, drawing a blueprint for China's development between now and the middle of this century. Our plan is to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by 2020; basically realize socialist modernization by 2035; and develop China into a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious, and beautiful by the middle of this century. We have the confidence and the ability to lead the Chinese people toward fulfilling the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation. Vietnam is, in line with the guidelines set at the 12th National Congress of the CPV, advancing all-round renewal for early realization of the goal of a prosperous people and a strong, democratic, equitable and advanced industrialized country toward modernity. We need to work hand in hand more than ever before in our pursuit of dreams of national strength and prosperity.
当前，国际和地区形势风云变幻，中越两党两国面临许多相同或相似的新问题新挑战。中国俗语称，“艰难困苦，玉汝于成”。越南有句俗语，“莫见浪头高，放下手中桨”。作为前途相关、命运与共的好邻居、好朋友、好同志、好伙伴，我们要维护和发展好两国关系，为各自维护稳定、深化改革、改善民生提供助力，共同推进社会主义事业，促进地区和平稳定和开放发展。我愿就此分享几点想法。
As the international and regional situations keep evolving, our two parties and countries face many identical or similar new problems and challenges. China has a saying, "Adversity makes one stronger, just as polishing makes jade finer." A Vietnamese saying says, "Do not put down your oar just because the waves run high." As good neighbors, friends, comrades and partners whose future is closely interconnected, we need to uphold and further grow our relations, support each other in our endeavors for stability, reform and people's livelihood, jointly advance the cause of socialism and promote regional peace, stability, openness and development. Here, I wish to share with you the following thoughts:
——把稳方向，谋求战略互信新高度。我们要保持高层经常接触，及时就两党两国关系及共同关心的问题交换意见，为中越关系掌好舵。积极开展执政兴国经验交流，加强党际交往，共同丰富和发展社会主义建设理论和实践，打造具有战略意义的命运共同体。
-- We need to keep to the right direction and achieve a new height in strategic mutual trust. We need to maintain close high-level engagement and have timely exchange of views on the relations between our two parties and countries and on issues of shared interest to keep the China-Vietnam relations moving in the right direction. We need to actively share experience on state governance and strengthen inter-party interactions, to enrich and develop the theories and practice of socialist development and build a community of shared future with strategic significance.
——深化合作，构建利益融合新格局。我们要继续把两国发展战略紧密对接起来，共同推进“一带一路”和“两廊一圈”建设，推动基础设施建设、经贸、产能、跨境经济合作区、农业等重点领域合作取得实质进展，给两国人民带来更多实惠。
-- We need to deepen cooperation and foster new prospects for our interconnected interests. We need to enhance the complementarity of our development strategies, promote the development of the "Belt and Road" and the "Two Corridors, One Economic Belt," and work for substantive progress in our cooperation in key areas, including infrastructure, trade, industrial capacity, cross-border economic cooperation zones and agriculture, to deliver more benefits to people of our two countries.
——扩大交流，筑就民心相亲新基础。我们要把传统友谊发扬光大，促进人文交流，密切文化、教育、旅游、青年、媒体等合作，讲好中国故事和越南故事，让中越友好扎根人民心间、代代薪火相传。
-- We need to expand exchanges and build a new foundation for people-to-people affinity. We need to carry forward our traditional friendship, promote people-to-people exchange, step up cooperation in culture, education and tourism and between our youth and media organizations, to help our people know each other better and enhance popular support for our friendship to pass on from generation to generation.
——加强协调，打造多边合作新亮点。我们要把握世界大势和时代潮流，加强在联合国、亚太经合组织、中国－东盟、澜沧江－湄公河合作等多边框架内的协调和配合，共同引领开放包容的区域合作，维护地区开放发展势头。
-- We need to strengthen coordination and create new highlights in multilateral cooperation. We need to follow the trend in today's world and of our times, enhance coordination and cooperation within such multilateral frameworks as the United Nations, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), China-ASEAN Cooperation and Lancang-Mekong Cooperation, and jointly champion open and inclusive regional cooperation to uphold the momentum of regional openness and development.
——着眼大局，续写敦亲睦邻新篇章。我们要从各自改革发展稳定和中越友好大局出发，管控矛盾分歧，坚持友好协商，寻求双方均能接受的海上问题基本和长久解决办法。我们要全面有效落实《南海各方行为宣言》，积极推进“南海行为准则”磋商，共同维护南海和平稳定。
-- We need to bear in mind the big picture and write a new chapter of good-neighborliness in our relations. Acting in the larger interest of our own reform, development and stability and China-Vietnam friendship, we need to well manage our differences and disagreements, and stay committed to seeking a fundamental and durable solution to the maritime issues acceptable to both sides through friendly consultation. We need to fully and effectively implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, actively advance the consultation on a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea and jointly uphold peace and stability there.
我这次访问还有一个重要日程，就是出席在岘港举行的亚太经合组织第二十五次领导人非正式会议。中方支持越方办好这次会议，愿同越方和其他成员一道，在“打造全新动力，开创共享未来”的主题下，就深化区域经济一体化、建设亚太自由贸易区、加强地区互联互通、推进经济结构改革创新、促进包容性发展、规划2020年后合作愿景等方面开展务实讨论，取得积极成果，为推动亚太共同发展繁荣作出积极贡献。
Another important agenda of my visit is to attend the 25th APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in Da Nang. China supports Vietnam in hosting a successful meeting, and will work with Vietnam and other members to engage in practical discussions on deepening regional economic integration, building the Free Trade Area in the Asia-Pacific, strengthening regional connectivity, advancing economic structural reform and innovation, promoting inclusive development and outlining the Post-2020 Vision under the theme of "Creating New Dynamism, Fostering a Shared Future." We look forward to a highly productive meeting that contributes to the common development and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific.
胡志明主席称越南同中国的关系“如手和足，如杵和臼，如根和茎，如兄和弟”。中国有句古话，“兄弟同心，其利断金”。我期待通过这次访问，同越南领导人以及各界朋友深入交流，共挖合作潜力，厚植友好情谊，深化两国特殊友好，携手开创中越关系新局面。
Chairman Ho Chi Minh once compared the Vietnam-China relationship to the one "between hand and foot, between pestle and mortar, between root and stem, and between elder and younger brothers." A Chinese proverb also says, "When brothers are of the same mind, they have the power to cut through metal." I look forward to having in-depth discussions with the Vietnamese leaders and friends from various sectors on this visit to tap the potential for cooperation, build up friendship, deepen our special ties and jointly create a new vista in China-Vietnam relations.
49. 习近平在南非媒体发表署名文章《携手开创中南友好新时代》
携手开创中南友好新时代 
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
For a New Era of China-South Africa Friendship 
Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
我很高兴应西里尔·拉马福萨总统邀请，对南非共和国进行第三次国事访问并出席金砖国家领导人第十次会晤。印度洋和大西洋环抱中的“彩虹之国”拥有独特壮美的自然风光、奋发有为的勤劳人民、绚丽多姿的多元文化。即将再次踏上这片美丽的土地，我心中充满期待。
It gives me great pleasure to pay my third state visit to the Republic of South Africa and attend the 10th BRICS Summit at the invitation of President Cyril Ramaphosa. I am full of expectations as I am about to set foot again on the beautiful land of South Africa, the rainbow nation standing at the convergence of the Indian and Atlantic Oceans, and home to unique and magnificent landscapes, industrious and enterprising people, and colorful and pluralistic cultures.
今年适逢中南建交20周年，但两国人民友好交往源远流长。早在共同的反帝反殖反种族主义斗争中，两国人民就结下了深厚友谊。新南非成立后特别是中南建交20年来，两国在探索符合本国国情的发展道路进程中始终相互支持、相互借鉴。两国关系经受住了时间和国际风云变幻的考验，实现了由伙伴关系到战略伙伴关系再到全面战略伙伴关系的重大跨越，呈现出政治互信、经贸合作、人文交流、战略协作齐头并进的强劲发展势头。过去6年里，中南作为中非合作论坛共同主席国，密切协作，推动中非全面战略合作伙伴关系不断向前发展。中南关系已经成为中非关系、南南合作以及新兴市场国家团结合作的典范，对打造更加紧密的中非命运共同体，构建相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系具有重要示范意义。
This year marks the 20th anniversary of diplomatic ties between our two countries, but the friendly interactions between our peoples go far beyond that. Our peoples forged a deep friendship during our common struggle against imperialism, colonialism and racism. After the birth of a new South Africa, especially in the past 20 years of diplomatic relations, our two countries have supported and learned from each other in our respective exploration of a development path suited to national conditions. This relationship has stood the test of time and a changing international environment. From a partnership to a strategic partnership, and then to a comprehensive strategic partnership, this relationship has made big strides and demonstrated a strong growth momentum in political trust, economic and trade cooperation, people-to-people exchanges and strategic coordination.
Over the past six years, our two countries have worked closely as co-chairs of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) to advance the comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership between China and Africa. Our bilateral ties have thus served as a model for China-Africa relations, for South-South cooperation, and for unity and cooperation among emerging market countries, and offered valuable experience for building an even stronger community with a shared future between China and Africa and a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness and justice, and win-win cooperation.
两国高层交往频繁，各领域务实合作成果丰硕。两国领导人保持着密切互访、会晤、交流，为两国关系发展进行顶层设计和战略指引。中国连续9年为南非第一大贸易伙伴国，南非也已成为中国在非洲最大贸易伙伴。2017年，双边贸易额391.7亿美元，比建交之初增长了20多倍。据不完全统计，中方累计对南非直接投资已超过102亿美元，增长了80多倍，为当地创造了数以万计就业机会，有力助推了南非经济发展。一大批中国企业在南非投资兴业并取得重要成功，书写了中南互利双赢、共同发展的精彩故事。南非企业在华投资同样取得不俗业绩。
We enjoy close high-level exchanges and fruitful practical cooperation across the board. Our leaders have, through frequent mutual visits, meetings and other exchanges, provided top-level and strategic guidance for the bilateral ties. China has been South Africa's largest trading partner for nine years in a row, and South Africa has become China's largest trading partner in Africa. Two-way trade totaled 39.17 billion U.S. dollars in 2017, more than 20 times the figure at the start of our diplomatic engagement. Preliminary statistics show that China's direct investment in South Africa has grown by more than 80 times and exceeded 10.2 billion U.S. dollars in cumulative terms, creating tens of thousands of jobs for local communities and giving a strong boost to the South African economy. Many Chinese companies are running successful businesses in South Africa, which is a full testament to our mutually beneficial relationship for common development. South African companies, for their part, are also making great success in China.
近年来，中南通过互办国家年、正式启动中南高级别人文交流机制等举措，拉近了两国人民的心灵距离，增进了相互了解和友谊。两国教育、文化、科技、卫生、青年、妇女等领域交流合作不断扩大。南非已成为吸引中国游客最多、建立友好省市最多、设立孔子学院和孔子课堂最多的撒哈拉以南非洲国家。中国也已成为备受南非留学生和游客青睐的求学和旅游目的地。中国中医药企业正积极开拓南非市场，为南非民众通过针灸、拔罐等中医药疗法祛病除疾、增进健康提供了新选择。中国志愿者广泛动员在南非的中资企业和华侨华人同当地动物保护组织合作，为非洲野生动物保护事业贡献力量。这些都是对中南、中非友好的生动诠释。
In recent years, measures such as hosting the Year of China/South Africa and launching the High-Level People-to-People Exchange Mechanism have brought our two peoples even closer with greater mutual understanding and friendship. We have seen expanding cooperation in such areas as education, culture, science and technology, and health, and growing exchanges between our youths and women. South Africa has attracted more Chinese tourists, established sister relations with more Chinese provinces and cities, and opened more Confucius Institutes and classrooms than any other Sub-Saharan country. China has become an increasingly popular destination for South African students and tourists. Traditional Chinese medicine companies are actively exploring the South African market, introducing acupuncture, cupping and other traditional Chinese therapies to the South African people as a new option to treat illnesses and keep fit. Chinese volunteers have mobilized Chinese companies and Chinese communities in South Africa to partner with local animal conservation organizations and make their contribution to wildlife protection in Africa. These are all powerful examples of China-South Africa and China-Africa friendship.
当前，南非踏上了国家建设和发展的新征程，拉马福萨总统提出了发展经济、创造就业、改善民生、推进社会转型等目标，并宣布南非进入了一个“充满希望和信心的新时代”。我们愿同南非方一道，以两国建交20周年为契机，“百尺竿头，更进一步”，推动中南全面战略伙伴关系更好更快向前发展。
South Africa is now on a new journey of national development. President Ramaphosa has put forth the goals of growing the economy, creating jobs, improving people's lives and advancing social transformation, thereby ushering South Africa into a new era of hope and confidence. China looks forward to working with South Africa to build on the momentum of the 20th anniversary of diplomatic ties and strive for faster and greater progress in our comprehensive strategic partnership.
——行稳致远，将中南政治互信不断提升至新水平。我们要继续保持高层交往，加强党际合作和治国理政经验交流，在事关彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解、相互支持，永远做彼此信得过的好朋友、好兄弟、好伙伴。我期待着9月在北京接待拉马福萨总统访华并共同主持中非合作论坛北京峰会。
- We must steadily elevate our political mutual trust to new levels. We need to maintain high-level exchanges, strengthen inter-party cooperation and governance experience sharing, continue to provide each other with mutual understanding and support on issues bearing on our respective core interests and major concerns, and stay forever as each other's reliable good friend, good brother and good partner. I look forward to receiving President Ramaphosa in Beijing in September and co-chairing with him the FOCAC Beijing Summit.
——锐意进取，推动中南务实合作不断取得新成果。我们要加强两国发展战略对接，发挥好双边、中非合作论坛、“一带一路”、金砖国家合作等机制和平台作用，不断深化两国产业产能、资源能源、基础设施建设、金融、旅游、数字经济等重点领域合作，更好造福两国人民。
- We must strive for new outcomes in our practical cooperation. We need to promote complementarity between our development strategies, and make full use of bilateral mechanisms, FOCAC, the Belt and Road Initiative, BRICS cooperation, and other platforms to deepen cooperation in key areas such as industries, production capacity, resources and energy, infrastructure, finance, tourism, and digital economy and deliver more benefits to our peoples.
——扩大交往，为中南人文交流不断增添新动力。我们要发挥好中南高级别人文交流机制重要作用，加强两国民间往来，扩大教育、文化、科技、卫生、体育、青年、妇女、智库、媒体等领域交流合作，夯实中南友好社会民意基础，让两国人民的手牵得更紧、心贴得更近。
- We must increase communication to add new impetus to our people-to-people exchanges. We need to leverage the role of the High-Level People-to-People Exchange Mechanism in enhancing communication between our peoples, expand cooperation in education, culture, science and technology, health, and sports, and promote exchanges between youths, women, think tanks and media outlets. Such measures will bring greater public support for China-South Africa friendship, and make our peoples be more closely connected.
——加强配合，推动中南战略协作不断迈上新台阶。我们要相互支持办好2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会和金砖国家领导人第十次会晤，加强在联合国、二十国集团、金砖国家等多边框架内的协调和合作，推动国际治理体系变革，共同维护非洲和广大发展中国家根本利益，共同推动构建新型国际关系和人类命运共同体，共同为解决当今世界最紧迫的问题贡献智慧和方案。
- We must strengthen collaboration and scale new heights in our strategic coordination. We need to support each other in hosting the 2018 FOCAC Beijing Summit and the 10th BRICS Summit, step up coordination and cooperation within multilateral frameworks including the UN, the G20 and BRICS, and promote the reform of the global governance system in a joint effort to advance the fundamental interests of African and other developing countries, to build a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind, and to contribute wisdom and proposals to solving the world's most pressing issues.
今年还是金砖国家领导人会晤启动10周年。10年来，金砖合作取得巨大发展，影响不断扩大。这次领导人会晤是金砖合作第二个“金色十年”的首次峰会。中方将全力支持南非方办好这次会议，在“金砖国家在非洲：在第四次工业革命中共谋包容增长和共同繁荣”主题下，深化金砖战略伙伴关系，加强金砖团结合作，助力金砖五国联动发展。相信这次会晤必将开辟金砖合作更加美好的未来。
This year also marks the 10th anniversary of the BRICS Summit. Ten years on, BRICS cooperation has achieved remarkable development and gained an ever-growing influence. This year's summit will be the first one held in the second "Golden Decade" of BRICS cooperation. China will go all out to support South Africa in hosting this event. Under the theme of "BRICS in Africa: Collaboration for Inclusive Growth and Shared Prosperity in the Fourth Industrial Revolution," we will deepen BRICS strategic partnership, enhance BRICS solidarity and cooperation, and facilitate the inter-connected development of BRICS countries. We are confident that this summit will usher in an even brighter future for BRICS cooperation.
今年也是新南非首任总统曼德拉先生诞辰100周年。曼德拉先生曾经说过，“非洲重获新生已经不再只是一个理想，其种子已经撒遍非洲各个区域，撒遍整个非洲大陆。”上个世纪，南非和非洲经过不懈奋斗重获新生。我坚信，本世纪将迎来南非和非洲大陆的全面振兴。让我们携起手来，并肩前行，昂首阔步，共同开创中南友好新时代！
This year celebrates yet another important event, the 100th anniversary of Nelson Mandela, the inaugural president of the new South Africa. To quote Mr. Mandela, "The African rebirth is now more than an idea. Its seeds are being sown in the regional communities we are busy building and in the continent as a whole." With unremitting efforts, South Africa and the rest of the African Continent gained a new life in the last century. I am confident that this century will witness the rejuvenation of South Africa and that of the whole African Continent. Let us work together for a new era of China-South Africa friendship.
50. 习近平在卢旺达媒体发表署名文章《中卢友谊情比山高》
中卢友谊情比山高 
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
China and Rwanda: A Friendship Higher than Mountains 
Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
应保罗·卡加梅总统邀请，我将于7月22日至23日对卢旺达进行国事访问。这是我首次访问贵国，也是中国国家主席首次到访卢旺达，我对此行充满期待。
At the invitation of President Paul Kagame, I will pay a state visit to Rwanda from 22 to 23 July. It will be not only my first visit to Rwanda but also the very first visit to Rwanda by any Chinese President. I am full of expectation for this visit.
卢旺达有“千丘之国”美誉。这里风景秀丽、四季如春、物产丰饶，这里人民勤劳勇敢、自强不息，是非洲大陆上一片充满生机的土地。
Known as the "land of a thousand hills", Rwanda is blessed with picturesque sceneries, a spring-like weather all year round, and rich endowment of natural resources. Thanks to the unremitting efforts of the brave and hard-working Rwandan people, this country has remained a vibrant land on the African continent.
近年来，在卡加梅总统领导下，卢旺达政府和人民励精图治、奋发图强，成功走出了一条符合本国国情的发展道路。当前，卢旺达政通人和、百废俱兴，社会长期稳定，经济持续快速增长，国际和地区影响力不断提升，给非洲乃至世界上面临发展振兴重任的国家树立了榜样。我为此感到高兴，衷心祝愿卢旺达在发展振兴道路上不断取得新的更大成就。
In recent years, under the leadership of President Kagame, the government and people of Rwanda have made pioneering efforts to blaze a development path that suits its national conditions. Enjoying good governance and social harmony, Rwanda is making progress on every front of development. With sustained stability and robust economic growth, Rwanda has seen a continued rise in its regional and global influence, and has set an example for countries who face the similar tasks of national development and rejuvenation in Africa and beyond. I am heartened to see these accomplishments and sincerely wish Rwanda still greater success on its way forward.
“相知无远近，万里尚为邻。”中卢两国虽然相距遥远，国家大小、制度、文化不尽相同，但两国人民有着深厚传统友谊。中卢在历史上都曾遭受深重灾难，因此都倍加珍惜当前国家稳定、民族团结、经济发展的局面，都为自己取得的发展成就感到自豪。
As a Chinese poem reads, "Good friends feel close to each other even when they are thousands of miles away." Despite the vast geographic distance and differences in size, system and culture between China and Rwanda, our peoples enjoy a deep traditional friendship. Both our two countries endured great sufferings in history. That is why we cherish the national stability, ethnic unity and economic development we now enjoy, and take pride in what we have accomplished along the way.
1971年中国同卢旺达建立外交关系。47年来，双方始终坚持真诚友好、平等相待，中卢两国人民友谊经受住了国际风云变幻的考验。两国人民彼此信赖、互帮互助，中卢友好深入人心。近年来，在双方共同努力下，中卢关系快速发展，各领域合作成果丰硕，不断焕发新的活力。中国已成为卢旺达第一大贸易伙伴和第一大工程承包方。我们高兴地看到，中国援建的阿马霍罗国家体育场里上演了多场精彩赛事，成为卢旺达民众休闲娱乐的重要场所。穆桑泽职业技术学校已成为卢旺达北方省最大的职业技术培训中心。即将实施的打井200口项目将有效缓解11万多民众饮水困难。中国企业家积极响应卡加梅总统提出的“卢旺达制造”发展战略，创办的服装公司为卢旺达发展本国制造业作出了积极贡献。中国公司修建的公路占卢旺达国家公路总里程70%，已成为家喻户晓的明星企业。
China and Rwanda established diplomatic relations in 1971. Over the past 47 years, our two countries have treated each other as equals with sincerity and friendship. Based on mutual trust and assistance, our friendship has stood the test of the changing international landscape and taken root in our people's hearts. In recent years, thanks to the concerted efforts of both sides, our bilateral ties have achieved fast expansion and demonstrated fresh vitality with fruitful cooperation in all areas. China has become Rwanda's biggest trading partner and project contractor. We are glad to see that the Amahoro National Stadium built by China has hosted many spectacular sports games and become a popular recreation and entertainment venue for the Rwandan people. The Musanze Integrated Polytechnic Regional Colleague has grown into the biggest professional training center in the Northern Province. The project of drilling 200 wells, soon to be delivered, will help ease water shortages for over 110,000 people. The garment factory that a Chinese entrepreneur has set up in response to President Kagame's "Made in Rwanda" development initiative is playing a positive role in growing Rwanda's manufacturing sector. Another Chinese company has made itself a household name in Rwanda as it undertakes 70% of Rwanda's national highway construction.
“国之交在于民相亲。”中卢人文交流丰富多彩，越来越多的卢旺达民众对中国和中国文化产生浓厚兴趣。每年有数百名优秀的卢旺达学子获得中国政府奖学金赴华留学。卢旺达大学孔子学院注册学员已近5000人，卢旺达武术协会有2000多名学员。在为卢旺达援建的马萨卡医院、基本戈医院里，中国医疗队用他们的医术和仁心救死扶伤，两所医院为60多万民众提供医疗服务。正在实施的“万村通”卫星电视项目将为卢旺达300个村庄配备数字电视，极大丰富15万多农村百姓的精神文化生活。
People-to-people friendship holds the key to good state-to-state relations. The rich and diverse people-to-people exchanges between our two sides have led to a growing interest in China and Chinese culture among the Rwandan people. Each year, several hundred talented young Rwandan students go to study in China on Chinese government scholarships. The number of registered students in the Confucius Institute at the University of Rwanda is approaching 5,000. The Rwanda Kung Fu/Wushu Federation has over 2,000 participants. At the Masaka Hospital and the Kibungo Hospital, two hospitals built by China, caring and highly-skilled members of the Chinese medical teams are providing much needed services to more than 600,000 local people. Digital TV services will soon be brought to 300 villages in Rwanda under an ongoing project of providing access to satellite TV to a total of 10,000 Rwandan villages, enriching the cultural life of over 150,000 rural residents.
当前，卢旺达正在积极致力于实施“2020远景”发展规划，中国正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标不懈努力。中卢合作发展面临历史性机遇。去年3月，卡加梅总统成功访华，我同他就新形势下深化两国各领域合作达成重要共识，为中卢关系未来发展作出了全面规划。我期待通过这次访问，为中卢传统友好和各领域合作注入新动力，推动两国关系迈上新台阶，蒂结新硕果，更好造福两国人民。
With Rwanda actively implementing its Vision 2020 Umurenge Program and China working toward its centenary goals, historic opportunities beckon for our cooperation. During his visit to China in March 2017, President Kagame and I reached important consensus on deepening cooperation in various fields under the new circumstances and made overall plans for the future growth of relations between our two countries. I hope my upcoming visit will inject new impetus to our traditional friendship and all-round cooperation, take bilateral relations to a new level, and produce fruitful results to the benefit of our peoples.
——坚持相互尊重，深化政治互信。双方要从战略高度和长远角度看待和发展双边关系，密切各层级交流合作，共享发展经验，为两国关系长期健康稳定发展筑牢政治基础。中方坚定支持卢方走自主选择的发展道路。
-- We need to uphold mutual respect and deepen political mutual trust. We should view and grow our relations with a strategic and long-term perspective. By way of enhancing exchanges and cooperation at all levels and sharing development experience, we will be able to cement the political foundation for the sound, steady and sustained growth of our relations. China firmly supports Rwanda in following the development path it has independently chosen.
——加强发展战略对接，扩大各领域合作。双方要发挥互补优势，拓展合作领域和途径，加强两国在基础设施建设、矿业、贸易投资等领域务实合作，将中卢友好更多更好转化为实实在在的合作成果，更好惠及两国人民。
-- We need to connect our development strategies and expand cooperation in all areas. By leveraging our complementarities and broadening the scope and channels of cooperation, we will be able to advance practical cooperation in infrastructure, mining, trade and investment, translating our friendship into concrete outcomes and delivering more benefits to our peoples.
——推动文明互鉴，丰富人文交流。双方要加强教育、文化、卫生、旅游、航空、人力资源培训等领域交流合作，夯实两国关系发展的社会和民意基础，让中卢友好更加深入民心。
-- We need to promote mutual learning between civilizations and further enhance people-to-people exchanges. Deeper exchanges and cooperation in education, culture, health, tourism, aviation and human resources training will help cement the social foundation for bilateral relations and gain increasing public support for our friendship.
——密切沟通协调，加强国际事务协作。中方赞赏并支持卢旺达作为非盟轮值主席国为维护非洲团结、促进非洲发展发挥更大作用。双方要继续在国际和地区事务中密切沟通协调，坚定维护广大发展中国家共同利益。
-- We need to strengthen collaboration in international affairs through closer communication and coordination. China commends and supports the efforts of Rwanda, the rotating chair of the African Union (AU), to play a bigger role in preserving Africa's unity and promoting its development. Our two countries will continue to firmly uphold the common interests of developing countries through close communication and coordination in regional and international affairs.
中卢友好是中非友好的缩影。几十年来，中非始终真诚友好、团结合作，是休戚与共的命运共同体和合作共赢的利益共同体。中国将秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观，同包括卢旺达在内的广大非洲友好国家一道，加强交流，增进互信，扩大合作。一个多月后，中非合作论坛峰会将在北京召开。我欢迎卡加梅总统以卢旺达总统和非盟轮值主席双重身份赴华与会，期待着同他会面，并同论坛其他成员方领导人一道，共商中非友好合作大计，共绘中非发展美好蓝图。
The friendship between our two countries is an epitome of the friendship between China and Africa. For decades, China and Africa have treated each other with sincerity and friendship. We are a community with a shared future and common interests, featuring solidarity and win-win cooperation. Going forward, China will continue to deepen communication, mutual trust and cooperation with Rwanda and with other friendly African countries, based on the principles of sincerity, real results, affinity and good faith and the approach of upholding justice and pursuing shared interests. In just over a month's time, China will host a summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) in Beijing. I will welcome President Kagame to the summit in his capacity as President of Rwanda and as the rotating AU chair. I look forward to meeting with him and other leaders of FOCAC members to draw up a blueprint for furthering China-Africa friendship and cooperation and promoting our future development.
卢旺达有悠久的“乌姆干达”文化，强调大家通过互帮互助、共同参与来实现共同目标。中国有一句类似的谚语叫做“人心齐，泰山移”。当今世界，各国相互联系和依存日益加深，同时也面临许多共同挑战。中卢两国应该同心协力、同舟共济，为实现互利共赢、共同发展，构建中卢、中非命运共同体携手前行。我深信，在两国政府和人民共同努力下，中卢关系必将迎来更加美好的明天。
The decades-old Umuganda culture in Rwanda encourages joint efforts and mutual help for common goals. A Chinese saying contains a similar message, "People with one mind and heart have the power to move a mountain." In a world of increasing inter-connection and inter-dependence, countries are faced with many common challenges. It is important for China and Rwanda to join hands for mutual benefit and common development and for a community with a shared future between our two countries and between China and Africa as a whole. I am convinced that with the joint efforts of our two governments and peoples, China-Rwanda relations will embrace an even brighter future.
51. 习近平在塞内加尔媒体发表署名文章《中国和塞内加尔团结一致》
中国和塞内加尔团结一致
中华人民共和国主席 
习近平
SUNU JAPPO, China and Senegal! 
Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
提起塞内加尔，人们马上会想到非洲足坛劲旅“特兰加雄狮”队，有世界最艰苦比赛之称的达喀尔汽车拉力赛。这里还是历史悠久、名人辈出的文化之邦。贵国开国总统桑戈尔就是著名诗人和作家，他1974年访华时，同毛泽东主席讨论过诗词，他的著作积极倡导“黑人传统精神”，提升了塞内加尔和非洲人民的民族自豪感和自信心。
When talking about Senegal, the Lions of Teranga, its national football team and one of the best in Africa, and the Dakar Rally, the world's toughest rally, are the first things that come to people's mind. Senegal is also a country with a time-honored history and rich culture and home to many famous names. Leopold Sedar Senghor, the founding President, was a renowned poet and writer. During his visit to China in 1974, he had a conversation with Chairman Mao Zedong about poem. His works, which champion Negritude, have inspired the people of Senegal and Africa with a strong sense of national pride and confidence.
近年来，在萨勒总统领导下，塞内加尔成为发展热土，正向“振兴塞内加尔计划”提出的宏伟目标迈进。我很高兴应萨勒总统邀请对塞内加尔进行国事访问。我期待通过这次访问，加深了解，增进友谊，深化合作，推动中塞关系得到更大发展。
In recent years, under the leadership of President Macky Sall, Senegal has become a land of robust growth, striding proudly toward the ambitious goals set out in the Plan for an Emerging Senegal. I am looking forward to my upcoming state visit to the country at the invitation of President Sall, an opportunity to enhance our mutual understanding and friendship, deepen cooperation and advance China-Senegal relations.
中塞关系已经走过47个年头，其间，有过波折，走过弯路，但双方相互支持、友好合作是主流，两国人民的心始终相连。2005年中塞复交后，两国关系翻开新的一页。中方支持塞方走适合本国国情的发展道路，塞方在涉及中国核心利益问题上给予中方坚定支持。两国政治互信水平不断提升，互利合作成果实实在在，在重大国际和地区问题上保持密切协调。中塞关系实现了从长期友好合作伙伴关系到全面战略合作伙伴关系的跨越。
China-Senegal relations have traversed a journey of 47 years. Over the years, despite the ups and downs or even setbacks at times, the relationship is overwhelmingly defined by mutual support, friendly cooperation and affinity between our peoples. The restoration of diplomatic ties in 2005 opened up a new chapter in China-Senegal relations. China supports Senegal in choosing a development path in line with its national conditions and Senegal firmly supports China on issues concerning China's core interests. Our two countries now enjoy enhanced political mutual trust, fruitful practical cooperation that benefits both countries and close coordination on major international and regional issues. China-Senegal relationship has been elevated from a long-term friendly cooperative partnership to a comprehensive strategic partnership.
现在，中国是塞内加尔第二大贸易伙伴、第一大花生进口国，双边贸易额10余年间扩大了16倍。中国是塞内加尔第一大融资来源国，由中国融资建设的方久尼大桥、捷斯－图巴高速公路等项目将有力促进塞内加尔经济发展。中方提供融资实施的乡村打井工程将建设251口水井和1800公里管线，解决塞内加尔七分之一人口的吃水用水问题，中方援建的国家大剧院、黑人文明博物馆、竞技摔跤场等为传承和发扬塞内加尔文化传统作出了重要贡献。
Today, China is Senegal's second largest trading partner and the top importer of Senegalese peanuts. Our trade volume grew by 16 times in just over a decade. China is also Senegal's biggest source of financing. The many China-funded projects, including the Foundiougne bridge and the Thies-Touba highway, will strongly boost Senegal's economic growth. The rural water supply project that includes 251 wells and 1800-kilometer pipelines funded by China will benefit one seventh of Senegal's population. The National Grand Theater, the Museum of Black Civilization and the National Wrestling Arena, built with Chinese assistance, stand as important venues to carry forward the culture and traditions of Senegal.
“路遥知马力，日久见人心。”当年，桑戈尔总统看到中国援助塞内加尔的农业专家同当地人民一样劳动、一样满手泥巴，非常感动。今天，中国专家仍在田间地头，同塞内加尔兄弟姐妹一起切磋水稻和蔬菜种植技术。友谊在两国人民心中扎下了根。2013年，65岁的塞内加尔老人比拉马参加“感知中国”知识竞赛。他从全球25万名参赛者中脱颖而出，获得了最高奖，并被邀请到中国旅游，实现了多年的访华夙愿。现在，每年有近800名塞内加尔留学生在中国学习，往来两国经商、旅游人数以20%以上的速度递增。每一通电话、每一封邮件、每一次握手都会多一分相知，人民友谊的涓涓细流正汇成江河海洋。
A Chinese proverb has it that, "Just as distance tests a horse's strength, time will reveal a person's sincerity." Decades ago, President Senghor was deeply touched when he saw Chinese agricultural experts toiling in the field side by side with local Senegalese, mud on their hands. Today, Chinese experts are still out there, working with their Senegalese brothers and sisters on rice and vegetable farming technologies. That's how friendship has taken deep roots in the hearts of our two peoples. In 2013, Birama Diadji TOURE, a 65-year-old Senegalese, took part in the Experience China knowledge contest and emerged winning the top prize out of 250,000 contestants from all over the world. Birama was later invited to visit China, fulfilling his long-cherished dream. Right now, some 800 Senegalese students are studying in China. The number of business and tourist travels between the two countries have been increasing by over 20% annually. With every telephone call, every email and every handshake, our mutual understanding goes deeper and the bond of friendship becomes stronger.
有句沃洛夫谚语说，“每个人都是他人的慰藉”。这同中国人常说的“我为人人，人人为我”是同样的意思。中国同包括塞内加尔在内的广大非洲国家从来都是休戚与共的命运共同体，有着相同的历史遭遇，面临共同的发展任务，怀揣对美好生活的共同追求。我们应该携起手来构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体，实现共同发展、共同繁荣。
"Nit, nit ay garabam (Man is the remedy of man)", says a Wolof proverb. Similarly, there is a Chinese saying to the effect of "one for all, all for one". Having gone through thick and thin together, China, Senegal and the vast African countries are bound by similar historical experience, same development tasks and shared aspiration for a better life. To achieve common development and prosperity, we need to join hands to build an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future.
我在2013年提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的是促进基础设施建设和互联互通，对接各国发展战略，实现共同发展。包括塞内加尔在内的许多非洲国家高度认同“一带一路”合作理念，愿积极参与“一带一路”建设。今年9月，中非合作论坛北京峰会将隆重召开。这次会议将把共建“一带一路”倡议、联合国2030年可持续发展议程、非盟《2063年议程》以及非洲各国发展战略结合起来，为中非合作开辟新天地。我们愿以此为契机，推动中塞关系实现更大发展。
In 2013, I put forward the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a pathway to common development through improved infrastructure and connectivity and greater synergy of development strategies. It has been warmly welcomed by Senegal and many other African countries, who have since shown great interest in joining the BRI cooperation. This September, a Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) will be held in Beijing. By bringing together the BRI, the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Agenda 2063 of the African Union and African countries' national development plans, the summit will break new grounds for China-Africa cooperation. It also presents us with an opportunity to elevate China-Senegal relations to a higher level.
——我们要坚持平等互信。双方要从长远角度把握两国关系，在事关对方核心利益和重大关切问题上坚定相互支持，做真诚相待、互信互助的好朋友、好伙伴。
We need to uphold equality and mutual trust. As good friends and partners who trust and help each other with sincerity, China and Senegal need to adopt a long-term approach in growing our bilateral relationship and firmly support each other on issues of core interests and major concern.
——我们要加强战略对接。塞内加尔处在经济发展的重要阶段。中国正在推动经济实现高质量发展。中方愿同塞方加强治国理政经验交流，分享中国改革开放40年来在工业发展、乡村振兴、脱贫攻坚等领域的成功经验，促进两国实现更好发展。
We need to foster greater synergy between our strategies. Senegal's economy is at a crucial juncture. And China is seeking high-quality development. As such, China stands ready to increase exchange on governance with Senegal and share China's experience from four decades of reform and opening up, including industrial development, rural vitalization and poverty alleviation, which will be beneficial to both of our countries.
——我们要深化务实合作。中方愿以共建“一带一路”倡议为牵引，以中非合作论坛为平台，同塞方发挥优势互补，重点加强农渔产品贸易加工、基础设施建设、产能、工业园区、人力资源开发等领域合作，帮助塞方提高自主发展能力。中方愿在科学规划、经济可行、循序渐进基础上，同塞方加强沟通和合作，确保融资可持续。
We need to deepen practical cooperation. Leveraging the BRI and the platform of FOCAC, China will work with Senegal to tap our respective strengths in the trade and processing of agricultural and aquatic products, infrastructure, production capacity, industrial parks and human resources development, all of which are important for Senegal's capability to achieve home-grown development. China also wishes to have closer discussions and cooperation with Senegal to see to it that financing arrangements are based on sound planning, economically feasible and done in a step-by-step manner, thus ensuring their sustainability.
——我们要扩大民心相通。双方要继续加强教育科研机构、文艺团体、新闻传媒、青年组织友好交流，让双方合作快车跑得更稳更远。
We need to strengthen people-to-people ties. It's important to further friendly exchange between our education and research institutions, cultural and art groups, media and youth organizations so that the express train of China-Senegal cooperation will speed ahead smoothly.
——我们要加强国际和地区事务合作。中方愿同塞方就联合国事务、维护多边贸易体制、气候变化、非洲和平与发展等重大议题加强沟通和协调，愿同塞方加强在中非合作论坛框架内合作，促进论坛机制和中非关系实现更大发展。
We need to enhance cooperation on regional and international affairs. China will step up communication and coordination with Senegal on major issues relating to the UN, upholding the multilateral trading regime, climate change and peace and development of Africa. We also look forward to working with Senegal under FOCAC to strengthen mechanisms of the forum and more broadly, the relationship between China and African countries.
中塞人民梦想相通，命运相连。让我们共同努力，推动中塞合作沿着互利共赢道路不断前进！中国和塞内加尔团结一致！
Similar dreams and shared destiny have brought the Chinese and Senegalese people together. It is thus our shared mission to join hands and bring our mutually beneficial cooperation to greater fruition. Sunu Jappo, China and Senegal!
43. 习近平在巴布亚新几内亚媒体发表署名文章《让中国同太平洋岛国关系扬帆再启航》
让中国同太平洋岛国关系扬帆再启航
Set Sail on a New Voyage for Relations Between China and Pacific Island Countries
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
我即将对著名的“天堂鸟之国”巴布亚新几内亚进行国事访问，并出席在巴新举行的亚太经合组织第二十六次领导人非正式会议。这将是我首次到访巴新，也是中国国家主席首次对巴新进行国事访问。我对此充满期待。
I will soon pay a state visit to Papua New Guinea, famed as home to the birds of paradise, and attend the 26th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting there. It will not only be my first visit to the country, but also the first-ever state visit by a Chinese President. I have great expectations for this trip.
巴新是面积最大、人口最多的太平洋岛国，自然资源丰富，发展潜力巨大，是一片充满希望的热土。近年来，在奥尼尔总理领导下，巴新政府和人民积极进取、奋发图强，国家发展欣欣向荣，社会面貌焕然一新。我衷心祝愿巴新在国家建设和经济社会发展的道路上不断取得新的更大成就，预祝巴新这次主办亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议获得圆满成功。
Being the largest and most populous Pacific island country and endowed with abundant natural resources, Papua New Guinea has enormous potential for development and is truly a land of great promise. In recent years, thanks to the leadership of Prime Minister Peter O’Neill and great work of the government and the industrious and enterprising people of this country, Papua New Guinea has thrived in national development and its society has taken on a new look. I sincerely wish Papua New Guinea even greater achievements in economic and social development and full success in hosting this year’s APEC meeting.
中国同巴新友好交往源远流长。早在100多年前就有华人漂洋过海来到这里，扎根当地、辛勤劳动，为巴新经济社会发展作出了重要贡献。1976年两国建交以来，双方坚持相互尊重、平等相待、互利共赢，中国同巴新关系经受住了国际风云变幻考验，历久弥新。
China’s friendly interactions with Papua New Guinea go a long way back. More than 100 years ago, there were Chinese travelling across the seas to Papua New Guinea who settled down and, with their hard work, made important contribution to the economic and social development of the country. China and Papua New Guinea established diplomatic relations in 1976. Since then, our two countries have treated each other with respect and as equals, and have pursued mutual benefit and win-win cooperation. Our relationship has stood the test of changing international circumstances and stayed as strong as ever.
近年来，两国关系进入了快速发展的新阶段。巴新是中国在太平洋岛国地区第一大贸易伙伴，中国成为巴新第一大外资来源地和第一大工程承包方。中国援建的独立大道、国际会议中心将为巴新主办这次亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议发挥重要作用；中国医疗队16年如一日为巴新民众提供人道主义医疗服务；使用中国政府优惠贷款建设的水电站、医院、校舍成为巴新各地的新地标；中国公司积极响应巴新政府提出的“2030发展战略”，在巴新全国参与建设公路、桥梁、机场、码头。
In recent years, bilateral ties have entered a new stage of rapid growth. Today, Papua New Guinea is China’s largest trading partner in the region, while China is the biggest foreign investor and project contractor in this country. For example, the Independence Boulevard and International Convention Centre, which will play an important role in Papua New Guinea’s hosting of the APEC meeting, are both built with Chinese assistance. For sixteen years running, Chinese medical teams have provided humanitarian health services to the people of Papua New Guinea. Hydropower stations, hospitals and school dormitories financed by Chinese government concessional loans have become landmark buildings across the country. And in an active response to the PNG government’s Development Strategic Plan 2010-2030, Chinese companies have taken part in the construction of roads, bridges, airports and docks locally.
18年前，我担任中国福建省省长期间，曾推动实施福建省援助巴新东高地省菌草、旱稻种植技术示范项目。我高兴地得知，这一项目持续运作至今，发挥了很好的经济社会效益，成为中国同巴新关系发展的一段佳话。
Eighteen years ago when I was Governor of China’s Fujian Province, I personally pushed for a demonstration project to help the Eastern Highland Province with mushroom and upland rice planting. I am glad to learn that this project, still in operation to this day, has produced good economic and social benefits for the local community and become a success story in the growth of China-Papua New Guinea relations.
我期待着通过这次访问，同巴新方一道努力，增进相互信任，拓展务实合作，扩大人文交流，推动中国同巴新关系再上新台阶。
In my upcoming visit, I look forward to working with your leaders to cement mutual trust, expand practical cooperation, and increase people-to-people exchanges in order to take our bilateral ties to a new level.
中国同巴新关系的迅速发展，是中国同太平洋岛国整体关系发展的缩影。4年前，我在斐济楠迪同8个建交太平洋岛国领导人举行集体会晤，各方一致同意建立相互尊重、共同发展的战略伙伴关系，中国同岛国关系进入了新的历史时期，焕发出新的勃勃生机。中国和岛国在推动双边关系发展实践中，坚持了以下原则。
The rapid growth of China-Papua New Guinea relations is an epitome of China’s overall relations with Pacific island countries. Four years ago in Nadi, Fiji, I had a group meeting with leaders of the eight Pacific island countries having diplomatic ties with China, during which we agreed to forge a strategic partnership featuring mutual respect and common development, thus heralding a new dynamic stage in our relations. The following principles have been adhered to in the development of relations between China and Pacific island countries.
——坚持相互尊重。中国和岛国视彼此为真诚朋友和友好伙伴。中方坚持大小国家一律平等，坚定支持岛国人民走符合自身国情的发展道路，支持岛国在国际事务中发挥应有作用。岛国在涉及中国核心利益和重大关切问题上长期给予中方宝贵支持。
– We have stayed committed to treating each other with mutual respect. China and Pacific island countries take each other as true friends and good partners. China believes that all countries are equal, regardless of their size. We support the people of Pacific island countries in pursuing development paths suited to their national circumstances and support Pacific island countries in playing a due role in international affairs. On their part, Pacific island countries have, for decades, lent valuable support to China on issues involving China’s core interests and major concerns.
——坚持深化合作。中国同岛国经贸交往日益密切，经济技术合作更加深入，共同利益的蛋糕不断做大。巴新的液化天然气、斐济的矿泉水、汤加的南瓜、密克罗尼西亚联邦的金枪鱼等特色商品已经成功进入中国市场。中国在力所能及范围内为岛国发展建设提供支持和援助，为促进岛国经济发展、增进人民福祉作出了贡献。
– We have stayed committed to deepening cooperation. Closer business ties and deeper economic and technological cooperation have made the pie of common interests between China and Pacific island countries even larger. A number of island specialties, including liquefied natural gas of Papua New Guinea, mineral water of Fiji, squash pumpkin of Tonga, and tuna fish of the Federated States of Micronesia, have made their way into the Chinese market. China has done what it can to support and assist in the development of the island countries, thus contributing to economic growth and people’s welfare in this part of the world.
——坚持民心相通。中国赴岛国游客年均超过10万人次。大量岛国青年学生、政府官员、技术人员到中国学习深造、考察研修。双方文艺团组交流互访频繁。中国海军“和平方舟”医院船访问巴新、斐济、汤加、瓦努阿图，为2万多名岛国民众提供了人道主义诊疗服务。
– We have stayed committed to building people-to-people links. Over 100,000 Chinese tourists visit Pacific island countries each year. Students, government officials and technicians from Pacific island countries also visit or study in China in large numbers. There have been frequent exchanges between cultural and art troupes of the two sides. China’s hospital ship “Peace Ark” has visited Papua New Guinea, Fiji, Tonga and Vanuatu, providing humanitarian medical services to more than 20,000 local people.
“相知无远近，万里尚为邻。”事实证明，浩瀚的太平洋是中国同岛国关系发展的纽带。放眼全球，新一轮科技革命和产业变革深入发展，如何把握机遇、共克时艰、加快发展，是中国和岛国共同的历史任务，也是双方人民共同的美好心愿。这次访问巴新期间，我再次邀请8个建交太平洋岛国领导人在巴新相聚，共叙友好情谊，共商发展大计，让中国同岛国关系扬帆再启航。
The Chinese often say, “Distance cannot separate true friends who remain close even when thousands of miles apart.” The vast Pacific Ocean is indeed a bond between China and Pacific island countries. As the new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation gains momentum across the world, our two sides face the common task to seize opportunities, overcome difficulties and speed up development, as this meets the shared aspiration of both our peoples. During my visit to Papua New Guinea, I will invite leaders of the eight Pacific island countries that have diplomatic relations with China to join me once again in a gathering to renew friendship, explore new ways of development and chart the course for future growth of our relations.
第一，战略互信要再上新台阶。中国将同包括太平洋岛国在内的广大发展中国家坚定站在一起。中方将秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观加强同太平洋岛国的团结合作，支持岛国发展，促进缩小南北发展差距。中国愿和岛国共同推动构建新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体。
First, we need to bring our strategic trust to a higher level. China will stand firm with Pacific island countries and all other developing countries. Following a policy of pursuing the greater good and shared interests under the principles of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith, China will enhance solidarity and cooperation with Pacific island countries, support their development, and help narrow down the development gap between the North and the South. China will work with Pacific island countries to build a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
第二，共同发展要再添新动力。中方愿扩大同岛国在贸易和投资等领域务实合作，欢迎太平洋岛国根据自身条件和优势，结合本国发展战略和规划积极参与共建“一带一路”。相信共建“一带一路”将为中国同岛国、各个岛国之间以及岛国同世界其他国家加强经贸联系和互联互通、更好参与经济全球化进程提供新的路径。
Second, we need to lend fresh impetus to our common development. China will expand practical cooperation with Pacific island countries in trade and investment, and encourage their active participation in the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) in line with their own national conditions, strengths and development strategies. I am convinced that the BRI will open up new pathways for Pacific island countries to enhance business ties and connectivity with China, among themselves and with the rest of the world, and for the island countries to take a greater part in economic globalisation.
第三，人民友谊要再谱新篇章。岛国有句谚语：“友谊是沙漠中的水渠。”我们愿同岛国不断扩大文化、教育、卫生、体育、青年、地方、人力资源培训等领域交流合作，欢迎更多太平洋岛国朋友到中国旅游观光、留学深造、投资经商、考察访问，加深双方人民相互了解和友谊，让双方友好事业薪火相传。
Third, we need to write a new chapter in people-to-people friendship. As an island idiom goes, “Friendship is a furrow in the sand.” China will continue to increase exchange and cooperation with Pacific island countries in culture, education, medical services, sports, youth and human resources training and at the sub-national level. We also welcome friends from these countries to visit, study, invest or do business in China. This will help deepen mutual understanding and friendship between our peoples and carry forward our friendship from generation to generation.
我这次访问巴新期间还将出席亚太经合组织第二十六次领导人非正式会议。这是巴新也是太平洋岛国首次主办亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，可以说是整个岛国地区的一件盛事。我期待着同各成员一道，聚焦“把握包容性机遇，拥抱数字化未来”主题，就区域经济一体化、数字经济、互联互通、可持续和包容增长等重要议题进行深入交流，为本地区和平、稳定、发展作出新贡献。
During my upcoming visit, I will attend the 26th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting. It will be the first time for Papua New Guinea, and indeed for a Pacific island country, to play APEC host. It will be a huge event for the entire region. Under the theme of “Harnessing Inclusive Opportunities, Embracing the Digital Future,” I look forward to an in-depth exchange of views with other member economies on regional economic integration, digital economy, connectivity, and sustainable and inclusive growth, so that we could jointly contribute to peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific region.
当前，中国同太平洋岛国关系发展正处于历史最好时期，面临重要发展机遇。中国愿同太平洋岛国一道努力，乘风破浪，向着双方关系更加美好的明天扬帆再启航！
The relations between China and Pacific island countries are now better than ever and face important opportunities of development. China will work with Pacific island countries to brave the wind and waves and set sail for a brighter future of our relations.
35. 习近平在巴拿马媒体发表署名文章《携手前进，共创未来》
携手前进，共创未来
Working Together for a Shared Future
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
应胡安·卡洛斯·巴雷拉总统邀请，我即将对巴拿马共和国进行国事访问。这是我首次访问贵国，也是中国国家主席首次到访巴拿马，我对此行充满期待。
I will soon pay a state visit to the Republic of Panama at the kind invitation of President Juan Carlos Varela. It will be my first visit to the country, and the very first by a Chinese president. I look forward to this trip with great expectations.
同很多中国人一样，我对贵国虽未曾亲至，但并不感陌生。巴拿马运河举世闻名，瑰夏咖啡声名远播，香蕉等热带水果享誉世界。近年来，在巴雷拉总统领导下，巴拿马经济快速发展，市场繁荣活跃，人民安居乐业，逐渐成为美洲的“人居天堂”和众多投资者眼中的“黄金热土”。我为此感到高兴，并衷心祝愿巴拿马在国家发展道路上不断取得新的更大成就。
Like many of my countrymen, I am no stranger to Panama even though I have never been to this country before: the grand Panama Canal, the highly regarded Geisha coffee, as well as Panamanian bananas and other tropical fruits are well-recognized throughout the world. In recent years, under the leadership of President Varela, Panama has enjoyed rapid growth, vibrant markets and improving living standards. It has become a most habitable place in the Americas to live in and a promising land of opportunities for investors. Seeing such progress, I am truly happy for Panama and wish Panama new and still greater accomplishments in its future development.
中巴两国人民的友好交往已延续160多年。160多年前，首批华人抵达巴拿马，帮助巴拿马人民修铁路、挖运河，最后留在了这片热情的土地上，积极融入当地社会，同巴拿马人民一道为了幸福而努力奋斗。为此，巴拿马政府专门设立了“华人节”。上世纪60年代，中国人民坚定声援巴拿马人民收回运河主权的正义斗争。为此，中国全国各地1600万人举行游行集会，成为那一代中国人难忘的记忆。这些都充分表明，两国人民血脉相连，心心相印。
Friendly interactions between the people of our countries could date back more than 160 years, when the first group of Chinese arrived in Panama to help with canal- and railway-building. On this hospitable land, they eventually stayed, became part of the local communities and joined the Panamanian people in pursuit of a better life. To mark their dedication, a special day has been designated for ethnic Chinese in Panama. Back in the 1960s, in a gesture of solidarity with the Panamanian people in their just cause for sovereignty over the Canal, sixteen million Chinese staged rallies across China, which became a special memory of the Chinese people for a generation. All these attest to the fraternal bonds connecting the people of our two countries.
去年6月，我和巴雷拉总统共同作出重大政治决断，中巴正式建交。对两国，这是一件功在当今、利在千秋的盛事。对世界，这是一面昭示大势所趋、人心所向的旗帜。国际社会倾听巴拿马恪守一个中国政策的正义宣言，两国人民一致支持中巴关系发展。
In June last year, President Varela and I came to a significant political decision: China and Panama would formally establish diplomatic relations. For both our countries, this landmark decision will benefit not only this generation, but many more generations to come. For the wider international community, it could not show more clearly the trend of our times and the will of the people. It is a strong declaration to the world of Panama’s commitment to the one-China policy and an expression of unanimous support among our two peoples for China-Panama relations.
一年半来，中巴关系强劲起步，各领域合作如雨后春笋般破土而出、茁壮成长，给两国人民带来了实实在在的利益。巴雷拉总统对中国进行首次国事访问，我们共同规划了中巴关系发展蓝图。中国保持巴拿马第二大贸易伙伴、科隆自由贸易区第一大供货国、巴拿马运河第二大用户地位。双方以共建“一带一路”为统领，签署经贸、金融、海事、民航、旅游、文化、教育等领域大量协议。中国企业和金融机构积极参与对巴拿马合作，为当地创造了数以千计的就业机会。中国援建的科隆平安城市项目将有效维护科隆市民安全，即将完工的阿玛多尔会展中心项目将成为巴拿马国际博览会新会址。巴拿马牛肉、菠萝、海产品等特色农产品正在履行输华检疫准入程序，相信很快就能摆上中国千家万户的餐桌。
Over the past one and half years, China-Panama relations have gotten off to a good start: cooperation programs have mushroomed and thrived across the board, delivering tangible benefits to the people of the two countries. During his first state visit to China, President Varela and I drew a blueprint for the future of our bilateral ties. China has been Panama’s second largest trading partner, the largest supplier to the Colon Free Trade Zone and the second biggest user of the Panama Canal. Under the framework of the Belt and Road cooperation, the two sides have signed quite a number of agreements in areas such as trade, finance, maritime affairs, civil aviation, tourism, culture and education. Chinese businesses and financial institutions have taken an active part in bilateral cooperation, helping to create thousands of local jobs. The China-assisted Colon Secure City project will provide effective protection to the residents of Colon. The Amador Convention Center, which will soon be completed, will serve as the new venue for EXPOCOMER. And Panama’s specialty agro-products such as beef, pineapple and seafood are undergoing inspection and quarantine procedures for export to China and will soon find their way to the dinner tables of the Chinese people.
根据巴方建议，中方正积极研究在巴拿马西部援建“希望之城”教育中心项目，将为2000多名当地学生提供教育服务，极大改善当地教育环境和质量。中方正在实施的爱心移动诊所项目将为巴拿马边远地区妇女提供免费医疗服务。巴拿马第一所孔子学院正式开课，中国和中美洲之间首条直航航线成功开通，巴拿马成为中国公民组团出境旅游目的地国。截至今年年底，中方共为巴方培养各领域官员和技术人员近6000人，近千名巴拿马学生在华学习。两国学者、智库、新闻媒体往来热络，共同为中巴关系发展建言献策、加油鼓劲。“中国热”和“巴拿马热”在两国同频共振，两国民众对增进彼此交流和相互认知的渴望势如泉涌。
As proposed by Panama, China is looking into the “City of Hope” education center project to be developed in Western Panama. The project aims to provide educational services to over 2,000 local students and will contribute significantly to local education conditions and quality. China is also implementing the project of mobile clinics (Amor Sobre Ruedas), which provides free medical services for women in far-flung areas in Panama. The first Confucius Institute in Panama is up and running; the first direct flight connecting China and Central America has been launched; and Panama is designated as an approved destination for Chinese group tourists. By the end of this year, China will have trained about 6,000 Panamanian officials and professionals in various fields, and close to 1,000 Panamanian students are now studying in China. Scholars, think tanks and media organizations from both sides have engaged in frequent interactions, contributing their ideas and suggestions in support of bilateral relations. As the “China fever” in Panama and the “Panama fever” in China are heating up, people in both countries are eager to know each other better through more exchanges.
巴拿马以互联互通立国，当前正积极推进“2030年国家物流战略”，力求打造世界级物流中心。这一战略同我提出的共建“一带一路”倡议不谋而合。中巴可以说是共建“一带一路”的天然合作伙伴。去年巴雷拉总统访华期间，巴拿马成为首个同中方签署“一带一路”合作谅解备忘录的拉美和加勒比国家。接下来，我们愿同巴方一道，撸起袖子加油干，加强两国发展战略对接，更好造福两国人民。
Panama, a nation strong on connectivity, is actively advancing its National Logistics Strategy 2030 in an effort to build itself into a world-class logistics center. This strategy dovetails with my initiative of the Belt and Road cooperation, making China and Panama natural partners for Belt and Road cooperation. During President Varela’s visit to China last year, Panama became the first country in Latin America and the Caribbean to sign a Belt and Road cooperation MOU with China. Going forward, we will work tirelessly with Panama to enhance synergy between our development strategies and deliver greater benefits to the people of our countries.
第一，我们要做平等互信的真诚伙伴。双方要始终从战略高度和长远角度看待和推动双边关系发展，相互理解和支持彼此核心利益和重大关切，为两国关系长期健康稳定发展筑牢政治基础。
First, let us be sincere partners that value equality and mutual trust. We should always approach our bilateral ties from a strategic and long-term perspective, appreciate and support each other’s core interests and major concerns, and build a solid political foundation for the sustained, sound and steady growth of our bilateral relations.
第二，我们要做休戚与共的发展伙伴。中国和巴拿马同为发展中国家，有着相同历史遭遇，面临共同的发展任务。双方要同心协力，推动构建相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体。双方要加强在联合国、世界贸易组织等多边场合的协调和配合，共同维护多边贸易体制，推动建设开放型世界经济。
Second, let us be development partners, come rain or shine. Both being developing countries, China and Panama have similar historical experiences and face common development tasks. We need to work together to promote a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation and build a community with a shared future for mankind. We also need to strengthen coordination in multilateral organizations such as the UN and the WTO, jointly uphold the multilateral trading system and contribute to an open world economy.
第三，我们要做互利共赢的合作伙伴。双方要在尊重彼此意愿、照顾对方关切、整合各自优势基础上，以共建“一带一路”统领两国合作，不断深化中巴基础设施建设、物流、产能、电子商务、金融等重点领域合作，争取尽快取得一批务实合作的早期收获，促进两国共同发展。我们欢迎巴方继续参加中国国际进口博览会，扩大巴拿马优质产品和服务对华出口。
Third, let us be cooperation partners in pursuit of mutual benefit. We need to respect each other’s aspirations, accommodate each other’s concerns and draw upon our respective strengths. We need to build on this basis to deepen our cooperation in such key areas as infrastructure, logistics, production capacity, e-commerce and finance under the broad framework of Belt and Road cooperation. We need to step up our efforts to quickly secure early harvests in practical cooperation as it will contribute to development in both countries. China welcomes Panama’s continued participation in the China International Import Expo and hopes to see more exports of quality Panamanian goods and services to China.
第四，我们要做心贴着心的亲密伙伴。双方要以民心相通为宗旨，广泛开展文化、教育、卫生、旅游、新闻等各领域交流，带动两国社会友好大发展。中巴已经开通空中直航航线，期待两国人民加强往来，增进相互了解和友谊。巴拿马有28万华人，双方要发挥好这条血缘纽带的作用，让中巴友好更加深入人心。
Fourth, let us be close partners with strong people-to-people ties. To build heart-to-heart connections between our peoples, we need to engage in exchanges in a broad range of areas such as culture, education, health, tourism and media. This will greatly boost our friendship across the sectors. Now that we have opened a direct flight between China and Panama, we expect more and more Chinese and Panamanians to visit each other’s countries to enhance mutual understanding and friendship. Today, 280,000 Panamanians are of Chinese origin. We could well build on such blood ties to deepen friendship between the two countries.
时代潮流滚滚向前，世界发展常变常新。中巴两国虽然相距遥远、国情千差万别，但都拥有极具奋斗精神、创造精神、追梦精神的人民。中巴关系发展离不开两国人民参与。让我们一起抓住机遇，只争朝夕，使中巴关系实现弯道超车、后来居上，使两国合作行稳致远，为建设更加美好的未来和更加繁荣的世界不断作出新贡献。
The trend of the times keeps moving forward, bringing new and constant changes to the world. Although our two countries are geographically far apart and are quite different in many of our national conditions, both the Chinese and Panamanians are hard-working, enterprising and aspiring peoples. We won’t be able to grow our relations without the commitment of our peoples. Let us seize the moment, give play to our late starter’s advantage, speed up the growth of our bilateral ties, put our cooperation on a steady and sustained course, and jointly contribute to a brighter future and a more prosperous world.
42. 习近平在文莱媒体发表署名文章
携手谱写中国同文莱关系新华章
Jointly Write a New Chapter of China-Brunei Relations
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
应哈桑纳尔苏丹陛下邀请，我将于11月18日至20日对文莱进行国事访问。这是我首次访问贵国，我对此行感到十分高兴。
At the invitation of His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah, I will pay a state visit to Brunei Darussalam from 18 to 20 November. This will be my first visit to Brunei, a visit I am looking forward to with great pleasure.
文莱国名寓意“和平之邦”。这里有旖旎的自然风光、浓郁的城市风情、祥和的社会氛围，仿佛中国古代诗人陶渊明笔下的世外桃源。近年来，在苏丹陛下卓越领导下，文莱走出一条符合本国国情的发展道路，国家繁荣富足，人民安居乐业。我衷心祝愿文莱取得更大发展成就。
Brunei Darussalam, the "abode of peace", is known for its charming natural scenery, fascinating urban culture and social harmony. All this reminds me of the fictional land of peace, harmony and idyllic beauty described by the ancient Chinese poet Tao Yuanming. In recent years, Brunei has, under the outstanding leadership of His Majesty the Sultan, embarked on a development path that suits its national conditions and delivered prosperity and happy livelihood to its people. I sincerely wish Brunei even greater success on the road ahead.
中文两国是隔海相望的友好邻邦。文莱自古便是海上丝绸之路的重要组成部分。早在中国西汉时期，我们的祖先就通过这条海上纽带互通有无，谱写了相知相交相亲的美好篇章。郑和率领船队两次途经文莱，给当地人民带来了和平与友谊，被文莱民间亲切称作“郑和元帅”。斯里巴加湾市的“王总兵路”和蒲公墓，中国南京市的浡泥国王墓，都见证了两国悠久的友好交往历史。
For China, Brunei is a friendly neighbor across the sea as well as an important link along the ancient maritime Silk Road. It is thanks to this maritime Silk Road that our ancestors started exchanges over 2,000 years ago (in China's Western Han Dynasty), and our peoples have got to know each other and developed a close bond of friendship. Many beautiful stories of our exchanges are still being told today. The fleet of the Chinese navigator Zheng He, who was fondly known as Panglima Cheng Ho among the people of Brunei, stopped over twice in Brunei about 600 years ago, bringing a message of peace and friendship to the local people. The Jalan Ong Sum Ping and Pu Kung Chih Mu in Bandar Seri Begawan and the Tomb of the King of Boni in China's Nanjing city all bear witness to the long history of friendly interactions between the two countries.
1991年，中国同文莱正式建立外交关系，两国绵延千年的“前缘”得以重续。双方建立战略合作关系5年来，政治互信不断深化，务实合作稳步推进，在国际和地区事务中相互支持和配合。中文关系步入历史最好时期，成为大小国家平等相待、互利共赢、共同发展的典范。
In 1991, with the establishment of diplomatic relations, China and Brunei renewed the millennium-old friendship. Since the two countries developed a strategic cooperative relationship five years ago, we have deepened political mutual trust, steadily advanced practical cooperation, and supported and collaborated with each other on regional and international issues. China-Brunei relationship has been as good as ever, setting a good example of relations between countries of different sizes based on equality and mutual benefit for common development.
我提出的共建“一带一路”倡议得到文莱方面积极响应和大力支持，双方签署谅解备忘录，推动这一倡议同文莱“2035宏愿”对接，为两国关系发展注入了新动力。
Brunei has warmly responded to and strongly supported the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) I proposed. Our two sides have signed a Memorandum of Understanding to build synergy between the BRI and Brunei's Wawasan 2035, lending fresh impetus to our bilateral relations.
今年来，两国经贸合作快速拓展。中国已成为文莱最重要的合作伙伴之一。恒逸文莱石化、“广西－文莱经济走廊”两大旗舰合作项目顺利推进。来文莱投资兴业的中国企业日益增多，为文莱经济多元化发展发挥了积极作用。中国企业积极参与文莱基础设施建设，承建了大摩拉岛大桥、特里塞－鲁木高速公路、乌鲁都东水坝等工程，提升了文莱互联互通水平，也成为文莱当地靓丽的“中国名片”。
Since the beginning of this year, economic cooperation and trade between the two countries have expanded rapidly with China becoming one of Brunei's most important partners. Two flagship projects, the Hengyi Brunei PMB Petrochemical Project and the Guangxi-Brunei Economic Corridor, are making good progress. More and more Chinese companies are making investments and doing business in Brunei, contributing to the diversification of Brunei's economy. Chinese companies are actively involved in infrastructure development in Brunei, including the Pulau Muara Besar Bridge, the Telisai-Lumut Highway and the Ulu Tutong Dam. These projects have improved local connectivity and become shining "brand names" of China in Brunei.
两国人文交流日益频繁。中国是文莱第一大游客来源国，斯里巴加湾市街头不时可以看到中国游客的身影。两国开通斯里巴加湾市至香港、上海、杭州、南宁、昆明的直航航线，为人员往来架起了空中走廊。南京市和斯里巴加湾市作为友城频繁走动，中文两国人民情谊焕发出新的蓬勃生机。
Cultural and people-to-people exchanges are flourishing. China is Brunei's biggest source of tourists and Chinese visitors are now a common sight on the streets of Bandar Seri Begawan. Direct flights operate like bridges over the air, connecting your capital with Chinese cities such as Hong Kong, Shanghai, Hangzhou, Nanning and Kunming and facilitating travelers between the two countries. The sister cities of Nanjing and Bandar Seri Begawan have enjoyed frequent exchanges between them. The friendship between the two peoples has thrived with new dynamism.
今年是中国改革开放40周年，也是共建“一带一路”倡议提出5周年。中方将坚持对外开放，推动“一带一路”走深走实，更好造福沿线国家人民。当前，中国和文莱分别处于实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标和实现“2035宏愿”的关键时期，双方应该加深了解，增进友谊，深化合作，推动中文关系更好向前发展。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up and the fifth anniversary of the BRI. Remaining firmly committed to the policy of opening-up, China will promote substantive, results-oriented cooperation under the BRI and deliver greater benefits to the people in BRI partner countries. As China is working for the "two centenary goals" of national development and Brunei is pursuing Wawasan 2035, our countries are both at crucial stages of development. It is important that we enhance mutual understanding, deepen friendship and strengthen cooperation to develop an even stronger relationship.
——我们要提升政治互信。双方要从战略高度和长远角度对中文关系发展作出规划，保持高层交往，增进政治互信，推动双边关系迈上新台阶。中方尊重并坚定支持文莱走符合本国国情的发展道路。
-- We need to enhance political mutual trust. To take our relations to new heights, our two sides need to plan the development of China-Brunei relations from a long-term, strategic perspective, maintain high-level interactions and enhance political mutual trust. China respects and supports Brunei in following a development path suited to its own national circumstances.
——我们要深耕务实合作。双方要加强战略对接，中方愿继续为文莱实现经济多元化提供助力，建设好重点合作项目，探讨能源、基建、农渔业、电子商务以及海上等领域合作。中方将鼓励中国企业赴文莱投资，欢迎文莱扩大优质产品对华出口。
-- We need to deepen practical cooperation. Our two sides need to build stronger synergy between our national development strategies. China will continue to assist Brunei in economic diversification, ensure the success of key cooperation projects and explore with Brunei possible cooperation in energy, infrastructure, agriculture, fishery, e-commerce, maritime and other fields. We will encourage Chinese companies to invest in Brunei, and welcome more quality exports from Brunei to China.
——我们要深化人文交流。双方要拓展文化、卫生、教育、体育、旅游、人力资源培训等领域交流合作。我们支持两国航空企业开通更多直航，鼓励更多中国游客赴文莱观光，欢迎更多文莱朋友到中国留学、旅游、工作。
-- We need to increase people-to-people and cultural exchanges. Our two sides need to expand cooperation and exchanges in culture, health, education, sports, tourism and human resources training. China supports the opening of more direct flights by our airliners and encourages more Chinese tourists to come here. In the same spirit, we also welcome more Bruneian friends to study, visit or work in China.
——我们要加强在国际和地区事务中的协作和配合。中方愿同文方一道，推动中国－东盟各领域合作深入发展，加快区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判进程，推动中国－东盟自由贸易区升级成果尽早落地，支持文方在东盟东部增长区中发挥更大作用。中方愿同文方携手维护多边主义、国际贸易体系、发展中国家正当权益，为地区和平、稳定、繁荣作出贡献。
-- We need to strengthen coordination and cooperation in regional and international affairs. China will work with Brunei to deepen China-ASEAN cooperation in various areas and accelerate negotiations for the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, so that we could deliver the benefits of the upgraded China-ASEAN FTA on the ground. China supports Brunei in playing a bigger role in BIMP-EAGA. China will work with Brunei in safeguarding multilateralism, the international trading system, and the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries, to make our contribution to peace, stability and prosperity in the region.
文莱有句谚语：“没有相互了解，就不能建立深厚情谊。”中国人讲：“人之相识，贵在相知。”我们愿同文莱做真诚相待的好朋友、共同发展的好伙伴。相信在两国政府和人民共同努力下，中文友好合作关系必将谱写出更加美好的篇章！
As a Bruneian proverb goes, tak kenal maka tak cinta (one may not like what he doesn't know). Similarly, the Chinese would often say, "For friends, what is precious is mutual understanding." China will remain Brunei's sincere and good friend and a trusted partner for common development. I am confident that, with the joint efforts of our two governments and people, we will write an even more beautiful chapter in our friendly relations and cooperation!
39. 习近平在菲律宾媒体发表署名文章
共同开辟中菲关系新未来
Open up a New Future Together for China-Philippine Relations
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
应菲律宾共和国总统杜特尔特邀请，我即将对菲律宾进行国事访问。菲律宾风景秀美，民风淳朴，国家发展日新月异，我对这次访问充满期待。在这里，我谨向菲律宾人民致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！
I will soon pay a state visit to the Republic of the Philippines at the kind invitation of President Rodrigo Duterte. I am full of expectations as I am about to set foot on this beautiful land, an ever-growing nation and home to an honest and friendly people. I wish to convey my cordial greetings and best wishes to the people of the Philippines. 
中菲隔海相望、一衣带水，早在1000多年前就已“舟舶相继，商使交属”。600多年前，中国航海家郑和七次远航，多次到访马尼拉海湾及维萨亚、苏禄等地，传播友谊和合作。苏禄国王带着菲律宾人民的美好祝愿踏上通往中国的友谊之路，留下脍炙人口的佳话。中国东南沿海许多居民漂洋过海来到菲律宾，同当地人民和睦相处。菲律宾国父、民族英雄黎刹的祖先就来自中国福建省晋江市。新中国的开国名将叶飞出生于菲律宾奎松省。他们都是两国人民共同的骄傲。
China and the Philippines are neighbors facing each other across the sea. The exchange of ships and merchants between our two countries began more than a thousand years ago. Over 600 years ago, Chinese navigator Zheng He made multiple visits to the Manila Bay, Visayas and Sulu on his seven overseas voyages seeking friendship and cooperation. The King of Sulu also made a goodwill visit to China, bringing with him good wishes to the Chinese people and leaving behind touching stories of China-Philippine friendship. Many born on the southeast coast of China sailed across the sea to settle down in the Philippines and have since lived in harmony with the local community. The ancestors of Jose Rizal, national hero and founding father of the Philippines, came from Jinjiang of China's Fujian Province. The famed Chinese General Ye Fei, who fought for the founding of New China, was born in Quezon of the Philippines. For both our peoples, these are proud names to remember. 
杜特尔特总统上任后，中菲双方重回通过对话协商妥善处理南海问题，两国关系经历风雨后，又见彩虹。短短两年多，中国已成为菲律宾最大贸易伙伴、第一大出口市场、第一大进口来源国、第二大游客来源国。中菲民间投资热情高涨，文化团组往来频密，越来越多菲律宾水果摆上了中国百姓餐桌，越来越多菲律宾名胜列入中国游客行程单。中国坚定支持菲律宾禁毒和反恐努力，支持马拉维战后重建，为菲律宾维护国内和平贡献力量。两国人民在灾害面前守望相助，谱写了一曲又一曲中菲友好赞歌。
Since President Duterte took office, China and the Philippines have reengaged in dialogue and consultation for the proper handling of the South China Sea issue. Our relations have now seen a rainbow after the rain. In just a little more than two years, China has become the Philippines' largest trading partner, largest export market and largest source of imports, and the second largest source of tourists. There has been a surge of interest for private investment in each other's countries, and interactions between our cultural groups have been frequent. More and more Philippine fruits are coming to the dining table in Chinese households, and a growing number of Philippine scenic spots are being included in the itinerary of Chinese tourists. China firmly supports the Philippines' fight against drugs and terrorism and its post-conflict reconstruction efforts in Marawi, thus contributing to peace in the country. In the face of disasters, our two peoples have stood together and come to each other's help, writing new chapters of friendship between our two countries. 
当前，菲律宾人民在杜特尔特总统带领下，推动实施“社会经济发展十点规划”、“大建特建”，开创了国家发展欣欣向荣的局面。中国人民也在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。共同期盼、共同梦想将中菲两国人民紧密连接在一起。
Under President Duterte's leadership, the Philippine people are striving to implement the 10-Point Socioeconomic Agenda and the "Build, Build, Build" Strategy, making the country more and more prosperous. The Chinese people are working unremittingly to fulfill their "two centenary goals" and realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal. Our shared aspirations and dreams have forged a close bond between our peoples. 
我这次访问的主要目的，就是同杜特尔特总统就新形势下提升中菲全方位合作深入交换意见，作出全面部署，推动中菲关系在高水平上得到更大发展。
I am visiting this time mainly to have in-depth discussions with President Duterte on how to elevate our all-round cooperation under new circumstances and make an overall plan for greater progress in our relationship toward a higher level. There are a number of things we need to do if we are to achieve this goal. 
——深化政治互信，推动中菲关系行稳致远。中方愿同菲方一道，以更加开阔的视野谋划两国关系发展蓝图，就双边关系及重大国际和地区问题加强战略沟通。我们要通过友好协商妥善处理分歧，加强海上对话合作，让南海成为造福人民的和平之海、友谊之海、合作之海。
-- We need to deepen political mutual trust to sustain the growth of China-Philippine relations. China wishes to work with the Philippines to draw up blueprints for our future relations with a broader perspective, and strengthen strategic communication on bilateral ties and major regional and international issues. We need to properly handle differences through friendly consultations, enhance dialogue and cooperation on maritime issues, and make the South China Sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation that truly benefits our two peoples. 
——坚持合作谋实，确保中菲关系根基牢固。菲律宾地理位置得天独厚，是共建“一带一路”的天然伙伴。中方愿同菲方一道，续写古代海上丝绸之路新篇章，推动“一带一路”框架内战略对接，深化经贸、基础设施建设、农业、旅游等各领域互利合作，助力菲律宾实施更多民生项目，让两国民众从合作中不断增强获得感和幸福感。中方愿同菲方持续深化防务、禁毒、反恐、执法合作，为两国发展和地区和平稳定营造良好环境。
-- We need to enhance practical cooperation to cement the foundation of China-Philippine relations. The Philippines, with its unique geographical advantage, is a natural partner in the Belt and Road Initiative. China wishes to work with the Philippines to renew the legacy of the ancient maritime Silk Road. China will work with the Philippines to enhance synergy between our strategies under the Belt and Road Initiative, deepen mutually beneficial cooperation in business, trade, infrastructure, agriculture, tourism and other fields, and assist the Philippines in carrying out more livelihood projects so that through our cooperation, the people of our two countries will have a stronger sense of fulfillment and happiness. China will continue to deepen cooperation with the Philippines in defense, drug control, counter-terrorism and law enforcement to foster a sound environment for the development of our two countries and peace and stability of our region. 
——坚持民心相通，实现中菲关系恒久如一。中菲两国地缘相近、人缘相亲、文缘相通，人民友好交往是两国关系的源头活水。众人拾柴火焰高。我们要推动两国政党、议会、地方、智库往来，加强教育、科技、文化、青年交流，调动更多力量参与两国合作，让中菲友好薪火相传、生生不息。
-- We need to strengthen people-to-people ties to keep China-Philippine relations as strong as ever. China and the Philippines are very close to each other in terms of geographical location, ancestral ties and cultural background. Friendly exchanges between our two peoples are an endless source of strength for our relations. As the saying goes, the flames rise high when everybody joins to add fuel. We need to promote interactions between our political parties, parliaments, think tanks and at the local level. We need to increase exchanges on education, science and technology, culture and between the youths. We need to encourage broader participation in our cooperation. This way, the friendship between our peoples will grow from strength to strength and be passed on from generation to generation. 
——坚持携手共赢，促进东亚合作深入发展。今年是中国同东盟建立战略伙伴关系15周年。菲律宾去年成功举办东亚合作领导人系列会议，今年又接任中国－东盟关系协调国，使命光荣、责任重大。中方坚定支持菲律宾履行协调国职责，愿同菲方携起手来，推动中国－东盟关系优化升级，推动东亚合作得到更大发展。中方将加大对菲律宾首倡的东盟东部增长区投入，进一步提升双方合作，打造同东盟合作新增长点，帮助菲律宾棉兰老岛等地区更好发展。
-- We need to join hands to deepen East Asia cooperation for win-win results. This year marks the 15th anniversary of China-ASEAN strategic partnership. The Philippines successfully hosted the East Asia leaders' meetings last year, and has taken over the noble and important role and responsibilities as the country coordinator for China-ASEAN relations this year. China firmly supports the Philippines' role as the country coordinator, and will work with the Philippines to upgrade China-ASEAN relations and secure greater achievements in East Asia cooperation. China will increase input in the BIMP-EAGA initiative launched by the Philippines, foster new growth drivers for cooperation with ASEAN through closer cooperation with the Philippines, and assist with the development of Mindanao and other regions in the country. 
40年前，中国开始了改革开放伟大进程。40年众志成城、砥砺奋进，中国人民用双手书写了国家和民族发展的壮丽史诗。中国成为世界第二大经济体、第一大工业国、第一大货物贸易国、第一大外汇储备国，对全球经济增长的贡献率超过30%，实现了联合国标准下7亿多人口稳定脱贫。中国正在全面深化改革、扩大对外开放，我们的改革不会停止、开放不会止步。
China started its reform and opening-up four decades ago. Since then, the Chinese people have worked hard with unity and perseverance and written a great success story in the development of the Chinese nation. China has grown into the world's second largest economy, the largest industrial manufacturer, the largest trader of goods, and the holder of the largest foreign exchange reserves. China now contributes over 30 percent of global growth, and has lifted more than 700 million people out of poverty by the UN standard. Now, China is deepening reform across the board and opening itself wider, and our effort in reform and opening-up will never stop. 
贸易自由化、经济全球化的时代潮流不可阻挡。中国作为负责任大国，坚持合作共赢理念，坚持扩大对外开放，愿同各国分享中国市场的机遇和潜力，刚刚成功举办的首届中国国际进口博览会就是最好证明。中国欢迎菲律宾和更多国家搭乘中国发展的快车。我们将同各国一道，坚定维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，推动国际政治经济秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
Trade liberalization and economic globalization is an unstoppable trend of our times. As a major responsible country committed to win-win cooperation and greater openness, China stands ready to share with all countries the opportunities and potential of its market. This commitment is made abundantly clear by the very first China International Import Expo, which was just concluded successfully. China welcomes the Philippines and other countries on board the express train of its development. China will work with other countries to firmly uphold the WTO-centered multilateral trading system and promote the evolution of the international political and economic order in a fairer and more equitable direction. 
数百年前，中国国内生产总值就曾占世界30%，但中国从未对外侵略扩张。1840年鸦片战争后的100多年里，中国频遭侵略蹂躏之害，饱受战祸动乱之苦。孔子说：“己所不欲，勿施于人。”中国人民相信，只有和平安宁，才能发展繁荣。这不是权宜之计，更不是外交辞令，而是思想自信和实践自觉的有机统一。我们将坚持和平发展道路，始终做世界和亚太地区的和平稳定之锚。
Several centuries ago, China's GDP already accounted for 30 percent of the global total, yet it never engaged in aggression or expansion. In the over 100 years after the Opium War in 1840, China suffered immensely from repeated aggression, wars and turmoil. Confucius once said, "Do not do to others what you do not want others to do to you." We Chinese believe that peace and stability is the only way to development and prosperity. This is neither a choice of expediency nor a diplomatic rhetoric. It is our firm conviction and a guidance of what we practice on the ground. China will remain committed to the path of peaceful development and will always stay as an anchor of peace and stability for the Asia-Pacific and the wider world. 
菲律宾谚语说：“抓住今天，才能不丢失明天。”中方愿同菲方把握机遇、顺势而上，传承和发扬崇尚和平、讲信修睦的亚洲传统，巩固和发展好两国关系，携手开创两国和亚洲更加美好的明天！
As a Philippine proverb goes, "Seize today, or you will lose tomorrow." China will work with the Philippines to seize the opportunity and go along with the trend of our time. Let us work together to build upon the Asian tradition of peace, credibility and good neighborliness, and further consolidate the bilateral relations for an even brighter future of the two countries and of Asia as a whole.
34. 习近平在葡萄牙媒体发表署名文章
跨越时空的友谊　面向未来的伙伴
A Friendship across Time and Space, A Partnership for the Future
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
“陆止于此，海始于斯”，葡萄牙“诗魂”卡蒙斯世代传颂的名句生动描绘出他的祖国所处优越地理位置。20年前，我曾有机会到访葡萄牙，2014年又过境特塞拉岛。应德索萨总统邀请，我将再次踏上这片沃土，对贵国进行国事访问，感到由衷的高兴。
"Aqui......Onde a terra se acaba E o mar comeca......" (Here, where the land ends and the sea begins.) This acclaimed quote from Luis de Camoes, the greatest poet of Portugal, vividly depicts the superb location of his motherland. Twenty years ago, I made my first visit to Portugal, and in 2014 I had a stopover in the Terceira Island. I am delighted to be coming back to your country for a state visit at the invitation of President Marcelo Rebelo de Sousa.
近年来，葡萄牙成功应对欧洲主权债务危机挑战，在发展国民经济、弘扬民族文化、促进社会进步等方面取得重要成就，古老大地不断焕发勃勃生机。作为葡萄牙人民的真诚朋友，中国人民对此表示钦佩。
Over recent years, Portugal has effectively coped with the challenges brought by the European sovereign debt crisis, and made significant headway in economic and social development and in promoting its traditional culture, injecting new vitality into this ancient land. As a true friend of the Portuguese people, the Chinese nation has nothing but admiration for what you have accomplished.
中国和葡萄牙虽然分处亚欧大陆东西两端，但两国人民友谊源远流长，历久弥坚。几百年前，中国青花瓷漂洋过海来到葡萄牙，同当地瓷器制作技术相融合，形成了独具魅力的“葡萄牙蓝”。葡萄牙东北部的弗雷索城很早就使用源于中国的桑蚕织造技术，享有“丝绸之乡”的美誉。当代，两国人民友好交往的佳话不断涌现。一对中国老教师夫妇克服疾病困难，数十年如一日在葡萄牙教授中文、传播中华文化；不少优秀的葡萄牙足球教练和球员到中国俱乐部执教或踢球，在中国足坛刮起“葡萄牙风”；中国厨师烘焙出的葡式蛋挞成为老百姓新的美食选择。这样的故事还有很多，见证了两国人民跨越时空的友谊。
Though our two countries are located at the east and west ends of the Eurasian continent, our peoples have forged an enduring friendship dating back to antiquity. China's blue and white porcelain, which was first shipped to Portugal centuries ago, inspired a fusion of Chinese and local techniques, producing a unique form of art Azulejo. The northeastern Portuguese city of Freixo de Espada a Cinta, known as the hometown of silk in Portugal, has been using sericulture and weaving techniques from China for centuries. Many more such episodes of friendly exchanges between our peoples can be found in the present day. An elderly couple from China, despite their age and illness, have spent decades teaching mandarin and spreading Chinese culture in Portugal. Top-class Portuguese football coaches and players have come to China to work or play for Chinese clubs, making Portuguese football even more popular in China. Portuguese custard tarts baked by Chinese pastry chefs have become a new delight for Chinese consumers. Stories like these bear witness to the friendship between our peoples that transcends time and space.
1979年2月中葡建立外交关系。再过2个月，两国将喜迎建交40周年。40年间，中葡关系一直保持平稳快速发展，走过了不平凡的历程。双方始终相互信任、彼此尊重、相互帮助，成为世界上不同社会制度、历史背景、幅员大小国家间合作共赢的典范。
In about two months, we will be celebrating the 40th anniversary of our diplomatic ties, which were established in February 1979. With steady and fast growth every step of the way, our bilateral relations have traversed an extraordinary journey over the past four decades. We have always trusted, respected and helped each other, setting a fine example of win-win cooperation between countries of different social systems, historical backgrounds and contrasting sizes.
40年间，双方坚持从战略高度和长远角度看待两国关系。1999年，两国通过和平协商，妥善解决了历史遗留的澳门问题，开辟了澳门发展新纪元和中葡关系新时代。2005年，两国建立全面战略伙伴关系。双方高层交往频繁，政治互信不断加深，各领域务实合作成果丰硕，中葡友好和合作驶入发展的快车道。
In the past four decades, we have consistently approached bilateral relations from a strategic and long-term perspective. In 1999, through peaceful consultations, we properly resolved the question of Macao, an issue left over from the past, and ushered in a new era in the development of Macao and in China-Portugal relations. In 2005, a comprehensive strategic partnership was established between our two countries. With frequent high-level exchanges, deepening political mutual trust, and fruitful outcomes in all areas, China-Portugal friendship and cooperation have embarked on a fast lane of development.
40年间，双方坚持平等互利、合作共赢精神开展务实合作。2008年国际金融危机和欧洲主权债务危机发生后，中国政府同葡萄牙政府同舟共济，共同抵御风险，应对挑战。中国企业踊跃赴葡萄牙投资兴业，在为当地创造就业、为葡萄牙经济社会发展提供助力的同时也拓展了自身海外业务。
In the past four decades, we have stayed committed to advancing practical cooperation in the spirit of equality and mutual benefit. In the wake of the international financial crisis of 2008 and the European sovereign debt crisis, our two governments worked closely together to defuse risks and address challenges. Chinese companies came to Portugal in large numbers to seek investment opportunities. While expanding their own businesses overseas, they have also contributed to job creation for the local communities and to Portugal's economic and social development as a whole.
40年间，双方坚持交流互鉴、共同进步的理念促进人民交往。建交之初，两国每年互访人数屈指可数，当前每年双向人员往来超过30万人次。目前，中国有17所高校设立了葡萄牙语课程；葡萄牙开办了4家孔子学院，多所院校设立了汉语课程。双方在影视传媒、演出展览、地方民间等领域的密切交流为双方关系长远发展打下民意基础。
In the past four decades, we have made consistent efforts to strengthen people-to-people ties in the spirit of mutual learning and common progress. In the early days of our diplomatic relations, there were few mutual visits between the two countries. Now over 300,000 visits are exchanged between us every year. Today, 17 Chinese universities offer Portuguese courses, and in Portugal, four Confucius Institutes have been opened and the Chinese language is taught in several schools and universities. Our close exchanges in film, media, cultural performance, exhibition and at the sub-national level have enhanced popular support for the long-term development of our relations.
当前，中国和葡萄牙都处在各自发展的关键阶段。中国正在全面深化改革，扩大对外开放。葡萄牙也在励精图治，寻求更大发展。中方愿同葡方一道，继续深化相互了解和信任，不断扩大务实合作的深度和广度，进一步丰富中葡全面战略伙伴关系内涵，共同创造中葡关系更加美好的明天。
China and Portugal both stand at a critical juncture of development. China is comprehensively deepening reform and expanding opening-up, while Portugal is committed to faster development and national renewal. China will join hands with Portugal to further enhance mutual understanding and trust, expand and deepen practical cooperation, and substantiate our comprehensive strategic partnership. By working together, we will create an even brighter future for China-Portugal relations.
第一，加强高层交往，做互尊互信的朋友。我们支持两国政府、议会、政党保持经常性交流和政策沟通。双方要始终理解和尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，为双边关系长远发展提供牢固政治保障。中方希望并相信葡方将继续在欧盟内发挥积极作用，推动中欧打造和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系。
First, we need to strengthen high-level exchanges and build a friendship based on mutual respect and mutual trust. We support regular exchanges and policy communication between our governments, parliaments and political parties. We should always give each other understanding and respect on matters of core interests and major concerns in order to provide a strong political underpinning for the sustained development of bilateral relations. China hopes and trusts that Portugal will continue to play a positive role in the EU and contribute to the building of China-EU partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization.
第二，共建“一带一路”，做携手发展的伙伴。葡萄牙是连接陆上丝绸之路和海上丝绸之路的重要枢纽，中葡开展“一带一路”合作具有天然优势。双方要以共建“一带一路”为契机，继续做大做强现有项目，用好中国国际进口博览会等平台，扩大双边贸易往来，在港口建设、汽车、新能源、金融等领域营造更多合作增长点，加强第三方市场合作，在更大范围实现互利共赢。
Second, we need to jointly take forward the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) and build a partnership of common development. As Portugal lies at an important intersection of the land and maritime silk roads, our two countries are naturally positioned to cooperate under the BRI. We should seize the opportunities provided by the BRI to expand and strengthen cooperation on existing projects, make good use of the China International Import Expo and other platforms to increase two-way trade, explore more cooperation opportunities in port development, automobiles, new energy, finance and other fields, and step up third-party cooperation to seek mutual benefit in a wider scope.
第三，深化人文交往，做传承友谊的使者。双方商定于明年互办文化节，加强展览、演出、影视、传媒等方面合作。双方要不断深化语言教学合作，扩大留学生交流规模。双方要继续支持两国航空企业合作，为双向人员往来创造便利条件。
Third, we need to carry forward traditional friendship by deepening people-to-people exchanges. As agreed, we will hold cultural festivals in each other's countries next year, and enhance cooperation on exhibition, cultural performance, film and media. We need to deepen cooperation on language teaching, and increase the number of students studying in each other's countries. We will continue to support cooperation between our airlines in an effort to facilitate personnel exchanges.
第四，开展海洋合作，做“蓝色经济”的先锋。葡萄牙被誉为“航海之乡”，拥有悠久的海洋文化和丰富的开发利用海洋资源的经验。我们要积极发展“蓝色伙伴关系”，鼓励双方加强海洋科研、海洋开发和保护、港口物流建设等方面合作，发展“蓝色经济”，让浩瀚海洋造福子孙后代。
Fourth, we need to lead the way in growing the blue economy by promoting maritime cooperation. Portugal, known for its tradition of maritime expedition, has a time-honored maritime culture and rich experience in the exploitation of marine resources. We need to strengthen our Blue Partnership, facilitate cooperation in marine research, ocean development and protection, port logistics and other areas, and grow blue economy together to better harness the vast ocean to the benefit of our future generations.
第五，密切多边协调，做国际体系的建设者和维护者。双方在许多重大国际和地区问题中有着相似和相同的立场。中方愿在联合国、世界贸易组织等框架内，同葡方加强全球治理、气候变化、联合国安理会改革等方面的沟通和协调。双方要坚持开放包容的共同理念，支持多边主义和自由贸易，共同促进世界和平、稳定、繁荣。
Fifth, we need to build and uphold the international system by enhancing multilateral coordination. China and Portugal share the same or similar positions on many major international and regional issues. China stands ready to step up communication and coordination with Portugal within the UN, the WTO and other frameworks on issues such as global governance, climate change and Security Council reform. It is important that we uphold our shared values of openness and inclusiveness, support multilateralism and free trade, and jointly contribute to peace, stability and prosperity of the world.
葡萄牙是我这次出访欧洲、拉丁美洲并出席二十国集团领导人布宜诺斯艾利斯峰会行程的最后一站。这次出访，我跨越亚欧大陆，到访大西洋两岸，感受到国际社会希望顺应时代潮流、坚持多边主义、改善全球治理的强烈呼声，各国人民期盼和平安宁、追求发展进步、过上幸福生活的美好愿望。面对当今世界各种问题和挑战，中方坚信，只有遵循相互尊重、平等协商，坚持和平发展、合作共赢，才能实现世界长治久安和人类共同发展。
Portugal is the last stop of my trip, which has taken me across the Eurasian continent and the Atlantic Ocean to destinations in Europe and Latin America and to Buenos Aires for the G20 Summit. What impressed me most during this visit are the strong international call for a firm commitment to multilateralism and more effective global governance in keeping with the times, and the ardent aspirations of people around the world for peace, tranquility, development, progress and a happier life. In the face of difficulties and challenges in today's world, China remains convinced that mutual respect, equal consultations, peaceful development and win-win cooperation are the only way leading to durable peace and stability of the world and common development of mankind.
中葡关系今非昔比，中葡合作前景广阔。相信在双方共同努力下，新时期中葡关系的航船将鼓起风帆、开足马力，驶向更加辉煌的未来，不仅为两国人民带来更多福祉，也定能为构建人类命运共同体作出更大贡献。
China-Portugal relations are now stronger than ever before, and China-Portugal cooperation promises broad prospects. We have every reason to believe that with the joint efforts of both countries, China-Portugal relations in the new era will gather full speed and sail toward an even brighter future, delivering greater benefits to our peoples, and contributing even more to the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
38. 习近平在西班牙媒体发表署名文章《阔步迈进新时代，携手共创新辉煌》
阔步迈进新时代，携手共创新辉煌
Joining Hands for New Splendor in the New Era
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
很高兴应费利佩六世国王邀请，访问美丽富饶的西班牙王国，开启我这次出访欧洲、拉美并出席二十国集团领导人布宜诺斯艾利斯峰会的行程。
I am delighted to visit Spain, a beautiful and richly-endowed Kingdom, at the kind invitation of King Felipe VI. This will be the first stop of my trip that takes me to Europe and Latin America for state visits and for the G20 Buenos Aires Summit. 
地球是人类共同的家园。当前，国际形势正在经历深刻复杂变化。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，人类社会已经成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。同时，我们也面临前所未有的挑战，特别是保护主义、单边主义不断抬头。我这次出访的一个主要任务就是同往访国家以及世界主要经济体领导人一起探讨加强国际社会团结，完善全球治理，发展伙伴关系，深化友好合作，促进世界和平稳定和发展繁荣。
The Earth is the planet we all call home. Right now, the international situation is going through profound and complex changes. Multipolarity, economic globalization, widespread application of ICT (information and communications technology), and cultural diversity have turned human society into a community with a shared future where our interests are closely intertwined. At the same time, we are confronted with challenges as never before, particularly rising protectionism and unilateralism. A major task of my trip this time is to engage with leaders of host countries and major economies in discussions on ways to enhance unity among the international community, improve global governance, develop partnerships, and deepen friendship and cooperation for peace, stability, development and prosperity of the world. 
西班牙是欧洲文明古国，这里人杰地灵、文化灿烂，曾在人类社会发展史上产生重要影响。中国和西班牙虽然地理位置相距遥远，但早在2000多年前，古老的陆上丝绸之路就将古都长安同西班牙的塔拉戈纳联系在一起。中国的丝绸和茶叶在驼铃声中穿越亚欧大陆来到西班牙。明代，西班牙人庞迪我将西方天文、历法引入中国，高母羡将儒家著作《明心宝鉴》译成西班牙语。塞万提斯在作品中多次提及中国，其不朽名著《堂吉诃德》在中国广为流传。历史表明，尽管相距遥远，但中西文明交相辉映、相互吸引，坚持走交流互鉴、共同发展的道路。
Spain is an ancient civilization in Europe. It has nurtured a splendid culture and many great minds, and has had a significant impact on the development of human history. On the map of the world, China and Spain may seem far away. Yet, more than 2,000 years ago, the ancient Silk Road linked up the ancient Chinese capital of Chang'an with the Spanish city of Tarraco, today's Tarragona. By the convoys of camels, Chinese silk and tea were carried to Spain all across the Eurasian continent. In the time of China's Ming Dynasty about 600 years ago, Diego de Pantoja introduced Western astronomy and calendar to China, and Juan Cobo translated a Chinese classic Beng Sim Po Cam into Spanish as Espejo rico del claro corazon. Miguel de Cervantes made repeated mentioning of China in his writings, and The Ingenious Nobleman Sir Don Quixote of La Mancha is a popular masterpiece among Chinese readers. History shows that despite the great distance, our splendid cultures have brought our people together, with mutual learning, mutual enrichment and common progress defining the exchanges between the two nations. 
1973年，中华人民共和国同西班牙王国建立了外交关系。45年来，历经国际风云变幻考验，中西双方始终相互尊重、平等相待、互利合作，推动双边关系健康稳定发展。
The People's Republic of China and the Kingdom of Spain established diplomatic relations in 1973. Over the past 45 years, withstanding changes in the international landscape, the two countries have always respected each other as equals, and have engaged in mutually beneficial cooperation and steadily promoted sound growth of bilateral ties. 
——这是互信不断加深的45年。45年间，两国保持高层交往势头，在涉及主权和领土完整的重大问题上始终相互理解、相互支持，为双边关系发展奠定了坚实政治基础。在上世纪八九十年代中国改革开放起步初期，西班牙政府向中方伸出友谊之手，提供的帮助对中国发展工业技术、改善设施条件发挥了积极作用。国际金融危机和欧洲主权债务危机发生后，中西双方同舟共济、互利合作、共克时艰。
-- The past 45 years has seen deepening mutual trust. Over the past 45 years, the two countries have kept the momentum of high-level exchanges and rendered each other mutual understanding and support on major issues concerning sovereignty and territorial integrity, thus laying a solid political foundation for the growth of bilateral ties. In the early years of China's reform and opening-up from the 1980s through the 1990s, the Spanish government helped China with industrial and manufacturing upgrading, something we treasure as a token of great friendship. After the outbreak of the global financial crisis and the European sovereign debt crisis, China worked together with Spain like passengers in a same boat to overcome difficulties through mutually beneficial cooperation. 
——这是合作不断密切的45年。45年间，两国经贸合作平稳顺利发展，合作的广度和深度前所未有。1979年中西双边贸易额首次达到1亿美元，2017年突破300亿美元大关。西班牙已经成为中国在欧洲不可或缺的经贸合作伙伴，中国也是西班牙在欧盟外第一大贸易伙伴。连接义乌和马德里的中欧班列为两国货物运输提供更多选择，成为共建“一带一路”的早期收获。双方在能源、电信、金融、环保以及科技创新等领域合作也不断推陈出新，为两国务实合作提供后续动力。
-- The past 45 years has seen ever-closer cooperation. Over the past 45 years, trade and business ties between China and Spain have enjoyed steady growth and bilateral cooperation has never been broader or deeper as today. Two-way trade, which was only 100 million U.S. dollars in 1979, exceeded 30 billion U.S. dollars in 2017. Spain is now an indispensable trading partner of China in Europe, and China is Spain's largest trading partner outside the EU. The China Railway Express container trains that connect China's Yiwu with Madrid offer more options for cargo transportation between the two countries, representing an early harvest of our cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative. In such areas as energy, telecommunications, finance, environmental protection, and scientific and technological innovation, our two countries continue to make fresh progress, providing new drivers for our practical cooperation. 
——这是文化不断交融的45年。中文和西班牙语是世界两大重要语言。45年间，两国在语言文化等领域合作蓬勃发展。费利佩国王担任王储期间，曾大力推动塞万提斯学院落户北京。今年，西班牙语正式列入中国普通高中课程标准。越来越多的西班牙青年在马德里中国文化中心、孔子学院学习汉语，体验中华文化。雷林科等当代西班牙汉学家笔耕不辍，中国大量西班牙语工作者将西班牙语言文化之美传递到中国。
-- The past 45 years has seen robust cultural exchanges. Both Chinese and Spanish are major languages in the world. Over the past 45 years, our two countries have enjoyed robust exchanges and cooperation in language and culture. King Felipe VI, as the Prince of Asturias, played an instrumental role in the launch of the Instituto Cervantes in Beijing. This year, Spanish is officially included in China's high school curriculum. Now, more and more young Spanish are learning Chinese and exploring Chinese culture with the help of the Chinese Cultural Center in Madrid and the Confucius Institutes in Spain. Contemporary Spanish sinologists like Alicia Relinque and Chinese hispanists are working tirelessly to bring to our people the beauty of each other's languages and cultures. 
今年是中国改革开放40周年，也是西班牙进行宪法改革40周年。中西在新时代加强合作，同解时代命题，共谋发展大计，是历史赋予我们的新责任。我愿通过这次访问，同贵国领导人和各界人士广泛接触，共同传承中西友谊，深化互利合作，为中西关系开启一个更加美好和辉煌的未来。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up and the 40th anniversary of Spain's Constitution of 1978. In the new era, China and Spain have a new historic responsibility to join hands and work together to answer the call of our times and pursue common development. It is my hope that, through this visit, I will engage extensively with Spanish leaders and people from across the sectors to carry forward our traditional friendship and deepen mutually beneficial cooperation for an even more brilliant future of China-Spain relations. 
第一，我们要提升两国全面战略伙伴关系水平，夯实双边关系政治基础。中方始终从战略高度和长远角度看待同西班牙关系，愿同西方保持高层互访势头，加强两国政府、议会、政党、地方等交往，始终相互理解、相互支持彼此核心利益和重大关切，牢牢把握中西关系正确方向。
First, let us enhance the China-Spain comprehensive strategic partnership and strengthen the political foundation for bilateral ties. China views its relations with Spain from a strategic and long-term perspective. China will work with Spain to keep up the momentum of high-level visits, increase exchanges between governments, legislatures, political parties and at sub-national levels, and continue to provide mutual understanding and support on issues of each other's core interests and major concerns. By so doing, we will bring forward our bilateral relations along the right direction. 
第二，我们要加强两国发展理念交流和战略对接，做好双边关系发展顶层设计。中方始终视西班牙为在发展道路上携手前行的好伙伴，愿充分发挥两国经济互补优势，用好各类合作机制，加强共建“一带一路”倡议同西班牙“亚洲发展战略”、地中海走廊建设对接，并积极拓展第三方市场合作，在更大范围内实现互利共赢。
Second, let us build greater synergy between our development visions and strategies and make proper top-level planning for the growth of our relations. China sees in Spain a good partner along the course of development, and China hopes to bring out the best the two economies could offer each other and make good use of existing cooperation mechanisms. We need to synergize the Belt and Road Initiative and Spain's "Strategic Vision for Spain in Asia" and the "Mediterranean Corridor", and actively explore cooperation in third markets for win-win cooperation in broader areas.
第三，我们要深化两国务实合作，拉紧双边关系利益纽带。中国将继续全面深化改革，扩大对外开放，落实创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享五大发展理念。希望双方继续秉持开放包容态度，拓宽双向投资，密切贸易往来。我们将每年举办中国国际进口博览会，愿同西班牙在内的各国分享中国市场的机遇和潜力。双方要充分发挥各自优势，加强先进制造业、信息产业、绿色经济等领域交流合作，优化合作平台，创新合作模式，打造双边合作新的增长点。
Third, let us deepen practical cooperation and expand shared interests. China will continue to deepen reform across the board, open wider to the world and pursue innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. China hopes that our two sides will remain committed to an open and inclusive approach to cooperation and further expand two-way investment and trade. Through the annual China International Import Expo, a platform will be provided for Spain and other countries to share the opportunities and potential of the Chinese market. Our two sides may fully leverage our respective strengths for closer cooperation and exchanges in advanced manufacturing, information industry and green economy. And we need to make even greater efforts to improve platforms, explore new models and nurture new growth areas for cooperation. 
第四，我们要扩大两国人文交流，厚植双边关系民意基础。民心相通是中西关系长远发展的根本保障。双方要不断拓展文化、教育、旅游、体育、青年等各领域交流合作，扩大两国航空联系，为双向人员往来提供更多便利措施。中西都是文化遗产大国，双方可以深化文化遗产保护领域合作。中方也愿加强同西班牙在大熊猫饲养、繁育等方面合作，让大熊猫成为两国友谊世代传承的使者。
Fourth, we need to expand cultural and people-to-people exchanges and build stronger public support for bilateral relations. Mutual understanding between the peoples holds the key to long-term development of bilateral relations. We need to broaden exchanges and cooperation in culture, education, tourism, sports and among the youth, and increase air links to facilitate visits between our peoples. Both renowned for rich cultural heritages, China and Spain could well deepen cooperation in the protection and preservation of cultural heritages. China will also step up cooperation with Spain in the rearing and breeding of giant pandas, so that these lovely "envoys" will continue to pass on the friendship between our two countries to future generations. 
第五，我们要密切两国国际合作，维护世界和平、稳定、繁荣。中方愿同西方密切在联合国、世界贸易组织、二十国集团等国际多边组织内的对话和沟通，在联合国安理会改革、全球治理、气候变化等重大国际和地区问题上加强配合和协调，共同维护多边主义和自由贸易，做国际秩序的推动者和捍卫者。
Fifth, let us strengthen cooperation in international affairs and uphold peace, stability and prosperity in the world. China will enhance dialogue and communication with Spain in international and multilateral organizations such as the United Nations, the World Trade Organization and the G20. The two sides may also strengthen collaboration and coordination on major regional and international issues such as UN Security Council reform, global governance and climate change, and work together to uphold multilateralism and free trade, and jointly contribute to improving and safeguarding the international order. 
今年是中欧建立全面战略伙伴关系15周年。中国一贯坚定支持欧洲一体化，乐见一个团结、稳定、开放、繁荣的欧洲。当前形势下，继续深化中欧全面战略伙伴关系，符合双方共同利益。西班牙是欧盟重要国家，也是中方在欧盟内的好朋友和好伙伴。我们希望并相信西班牙将继续在欧盟内发挥积极作用，推动中欧关系健康稳定发展。
This year also marks the 15th anniversary of the China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership. China is a staunch supporter of European integration, and China is happy to see a united, stable, open and prosperous Europe. Under the current circumstances, it is in the common interests of both sides to deepen the comprehensive strategic partnership between China and the EU. Spain is an important member of the EU; it is also China's good friend and good partner in the EU. We hope and believe that Spain will continue to play a positive role in the EU for the sound and steady growth of China-EU relations. 
西班牙思想家加塞特说，“志向远大方能进步，目光长远才能前行”。中方期待着同西班牙一道努力，共享机遇，共迎挑战，携手谱写中西关系新篇章，开创属于两国人民的美好未来。
The Spanish philosopher Jose Ortega Gasset once observed, one can only make progress when he thinks big, and move forward when he looks far. China looks forward to working with Spain to share opportunities and jointly meet challenges. Together, we can write a new chapter in China-Spain relations and usher in an even brighter future for our peoples.
37. 习近平在阿根廷媒体发表署名文章《开创中阿关系新时代》
开创中阿关系新时代
Opening up a New Era in China-Argentina Relations
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
在南半球充满希望的阳春时节，我很高兴应毛里西奥·马克里总统邀请，出席二十国集团领导人布宜诺斯艾利斯峰会，并对阿根廷共和国进行国事访问。
It gives me great pleasure to attend the G20 Buenos Aires Summit and pay a state visit to the Argentine Republic at the invitation of President Mauricio Macri in the promising season of spring in the southern hemisphere. 
“海内存知己，天涯若比邻。”中阿两国虽然相距遥远，但两国人民热爱和平，相知相守。两国关系经历了国际风云变幻考验，成为新兴市场国家和发展中国家团结合作、共同发展的典范。
As an ancient Chinese poem reads, "If you have a friend afar who knows your heart, distance cannot keep you two apart." The peace-loving people of China and Argentina have rendered each other mutual understanding and support, the geographical distance between us notwithstanding. And our bilateral relations have stood the test of changing international circumstances and set an example of solidarity and cooperation for common development between two emerging economies and developing countries. 
——中阿是相互信任的好朋友。短短两年多来，我同马克里总统4次会晤，就双边关系发展达成重要共识，也感受到双方对发展中阿关系的高度重视。中方坚定支持阿根廷探索符合本国国情的发展道路，对阿根廷未来发展充满信心。目前，中阿政府间常设委员会、经济合作与协调战略对话、议会政治对话委员会、经济贸易混合委员会等机制运行顺畅，为两国关系不断取得新进展注入了强劲动力。中阿在尊重主权、维护领土完整等问题上也始终相互支持。
-- China and Argentina are good friends who trust each other. During our four meetings in a short span of two years, President Macri and I reached important agreement on ways to grow bilateral relations and we are united in placing enormous importance on China-Argentina relations. China firmly supports Argentina in exploring a development path suited to its national conditions and has every confidence about its future. Bilateral mechanisms such as the inter-governmental permanent committee, the strategic dialogue for economic cooperation and coordination, the parliamentary political dialogue committee and the mixed commission on economic and trade cooperation have been operating smoothly, injecting strong impetus into continued progress of bilateral ties. Our two countries have also supported each other on issues of respecting sovereignty and upholding territorial integrity. 
——中阿是共同发展的好伙伴。目前，中国是阿根廷第二大贸易伙伴、第一大农产品出口目的地国。2017年，双边贸易额138亿美元，与建交时相比，增长近2300倍。阿根廷新鲜水果、牛肉、红酒、海产品等受到中国消费者欢迎。中国在阿根廷投资超过100亿美元，涵盖基础设施建设、能源、通信、农业等领域，创造了数以万计的工作岗位。中国制造、中国技术助力阿根廷更好实现互联互通，提高竞争力。中阿扩大本币互换规模，中国金融机构在阿根廷设立分支机构，金融合作为阿根廷经济社会发展提供了支持和服务。
-- China and Argentina are good partners of common development. China is Argentina's second largest trading partner and largest destination of its agricultural exports. In 2017 two-way trade reached US$13.8 billion, up by nearly 2,300 times since the establishment of diplomatic relations. Fresh fruit, beef, red wine and seafood from Argentina are well liked by Chinese consumers. China has invested over US$10 billion in Argentina in sectors such as infrastructure, energy, communications and agriculture, creating tens of thousands of local jobs. Chinese products and technologies have contributed to Argentina's pursuit of greater connectivity and competitiveness. Our two countries have increased the scale of local currency swaps. Chinese financial institutions have opened branches in Argentina. Such financial cooperation has provided support and services for Argentina's economic and social development. 
——中阿是兼收并蓄的好知音。阿根廷人有引以为豪的两双脚，一双用来踢足球，另一双用来跳探戈。当前，不少阿根廷球员和教练加盟中国足球联赛，成批次的中国青少年赴阿根廷接受足球训练。中国很多城市成立了探戈舞协会和俱乐部，中国选手参加探戈世界锦标赛并屡屡获奖。“中国热”、“汉语热”在阿根廷热度不减。文学巨匠博尔赫斯在《漆手杖》等作品中多次提及庄周梦蝶、长城等中国元素，并且有一根心爱的中国漆手杖。今年，超过80万人次的阿根廷民众参加了在当地举行的春节庙会，孔子学院和公立全日制中西双语学校更是座无虚席。双方还在不断优化航班衔接，便利更多中国游客领略阿根廷冰川、瀑布、高乔文化的魅力。
-- China and Argentina are close friends that admire each other's achievements and value mutual learning. There are two passions for Argentinians, both centering on movements of the feet. One is football, and the other is tango. Argentine football players and coaches have joined Chinese football leagues. And groups of young Chinese have received football training in Argentina. There are tango dance associations and clubs in many Chinese cities. And Chinese dancers have competed and won medals in world tango tournaments. Among Argentinians, there is an abiding interest in China and the Chinese language. The literary legend Jorge Luis Borges used Chinese allusions such as the butterfly dream of the philosopher Chuang Tzu and the Great Wall in his works, including The Paint Cane. And he indeed had a cherished Chinese paint cane in his possession. More than 800,000 Argentinians participated in Spring Festival temple fairs held in local communities early this year. The Confucius Institutes and full-time public schools that teach in both Chinese and Spanish languages are packed with students. Our two sides are also working on ways to make flight connections more convenient for Chinese tourists to travel to Argentina and appreciate the charm of glaciers, waterfalls, and the gaucho culture. 
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局。世界多极化、经济全球化势头不可阻挡，日益频发的全球性挑战也不容忽视。中阿两国正处于各自发展的关键阶段。中国人民正在为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力，阿根廷人民也在为实现发展振兴的阿根廷梦而努力。让我们抓住历史机遇，顺应时代潮流，携手开创中阿全面战略伙伴关系新时代，更好造福两国人民。
The world we live in today has been undergoing tremendous changes which are unseen in a century. While the momentum of multi-polarity and economic globalization is unstoppable, rising global challenges have also emerged. Both China and Argentina are at a crucial stage of development. The Chinese people are making unremitting efforts to realize the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. And the Argentine people are striving to realize the Argentine dream of development and revitalization. Let us seize historical opportunities, move forward with the times, and join hands to open up a new era in China-Argentina comprehensive strategic partnership to the greater benefit of our peoples. 
第一，加强战略沟通，坚持互尊互信。以更广阔的视野谋划两国关系发展蓝图，加强政府、议会、政党、地方等各领域各层级交往，密切治国理政经验交流，不断增进相互了解和政治互信，在事关彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上继续相互坚定支持。
First, we need to strengthen strategic communication based on mutual respect and trust. To grow our bilateral relations, it is important to draw up a blueprint with a broader vision to guide intensified exchanges in various fields between governments, legislatures and political parties and at sub-national levels and to increase the sharing of governance experience. It is important that we enhance mutual understanding and political trust, and give each other continued firm support on matters concerning core interests and major concerns. 
第二，深化务实合作，实现互利双赢。加强两国发展战略对接，共同推进“一带一路”建设。不断深化基础设施建设、能源、农业、矿业、制造业等重点领域合作，推进贸易便利化安排，用好电子商务等合作新模式。我们欢迎阿方继续参加中国国际进口博览会，扩大对华出口。期待更多阿根廷高附加值产品及服务进入中国市场，助力阿根廷从“世界粮仓”向“世界超市”转型。
Second, we need to deepen practical cooperation for win-win results. Efforts need to be made to better synergize our development strategies to take forward the Belt and Road Initiative. Cooperation will be deepened in such key areas as infrastructure, energy, agriculture, mining and manufacturing. Trade facilitation will be promoted and new cooperation models such as e-commerce leveraged. China welcomes Argentina's continued participation in the China International Import Expo and hopes to see more Argentine exports to China. We look forward to more high value-added Argentine products and services in the Chinese market, which will expectedly support Argentina's transformation from the world's granary to supermarket. 
第三，扩大人文交流，加强互学互鉴。鼓励两国民间往来，扩大文化、教育、科技、地方、体育、旅游等领域交流合作，实施更多便利人员往来的措施，分享发展经验，夯实中阿友好民意基础。
Third, we need to expand people-to-people exchanges for mutual learning. More people-to-people interactions will be encouraged, and cooperation in culture, education, science and technology, sports and tourism and at sub-national levels expanded. More measures may be introduced to facilitate personnel flows and share development experience. All this will contribute to stronger public support for China-Argentina friendship. 
第四，增强协调配合，继续互帮互助。加强双方在联合国、二十国集团、世界贸易组织、七十七国集团等多边框架内协作，支持经济全球化和多边贸易体制，维护新兴市场国家和广大发展中国家根本利益，为维护世界和平、建设开放型世界经济、推动构建人类命运共同体作出应有贡献。
Fourth, we need to enhance coordination and collaboration for mutual support. Coordination under multilateral frameworks will be strengthened, including at the United Nations, G20, WTO and the Group of 77, to underline support for economic globalization and the multilateral trading system and safeguard the fundamental interests of emerging markets and developing countries. Together, we will make our contributions to maintaining world peace and building an open world economy and a community with a shared future for mankind. 
中阿关系全面快速发展正是中拉关系蓬勃生机的缩影。中拉是发展中国家和新兴市场国家的重要代表，都面临前所未有的机遇和挑战。我们需要深化合作，携手共进。为此，我提出构建中拉命运共同体，倡议中拉描绘共建“一带一路”新蓝图，得到拉美和加勒比朋友们积极响应。我们愿同拉美和加勒比国家一道，秉持共商共建共享原则，以政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通为合作重点，通过共建“一带一路”给中拉人民带来更多实惠，促进中拉合作优化升级、创新发展。
The all-round, fast growth of China-Argentina relations is an epitome of the vibrant relations between China and countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. China and Latin American and Caribbean countries, as important developing countries and emerging markets, all face unprecedented opportunities and challenges. It is therefore important for us to deepen cooperation and make progress with concerted efforts. This is why I have called for forging a community with a shared future and formulating a new blueprint for Belt and Road cooperation between China, Latin American and Caribbean countries. Both initiatives have been warmly received by friends from countries in the region. Guided by the principle of consultation, collaboration and benefit for all, China is ready to work with Latin American and Caribbean countries to promote connectivity in the five priority areas as policy, infrastructure, trade, finance and people-to-people ties. All this will help translate our Belt and Road cooperation into more tangible benefits for our peoples, and facilitate cooperation upgrading and the fostering of new growth areas in our relations. 
今年是二十国集团领导人峰会启动10周年。经过10年历程，二十国集团在应对国际金融危机、推动世界经济复苏方面成绩斐然，成为世界经济的稳定器、全球经济治理的推进器。二十国集团要继续发挥国际经济合作主要论坛作用，落实历届峰会共识，引领世界经济前进方向。中方将在“为公平与可持续发展凝聚共识”主题引领下，全力支持阿方举办一届成功峰会，也对这次峰会充满期待。
This year marks the 10th anniversary of the G20 Summit. A decade on, the G20, with its remarkable achievements in coping with the international financial crisis and promoting global recovery, has become an anchor of the world economy and a propeller for global economic governance. It is vital for the G20 to maintain its role as a premier forum on international economic cooperation, follow through on the consensus of previous summits, and chart the course for the world economy. Following the theme of "Building Consensus for Fair and Sustainable Development", China will give its full support to Argentina in hosting a successful G20 Summit, for which we are full of expectations. 
希望二十国集团继续秉持同舟共济的伙伴精神。这种精神曾指引二十国集团走过国际金融危机风雨，也将继续鼓舞二十国集团引领世界经济浪潮。携手引领世界经济在正确轨道上发展，既是二十国集团成立初心所在，也是二十国集团最重要任务。我们既要加强宏观政策协调和合作，更要旗帜鲜明地维护多边贸易体制，推动构建开放型世界经济。
We hope the G20 will stay committed to the spirit of solidarity and partnership. As it has been instrumental in steering the G20 through the storms of the international financial crisis, this very spirit will continue to inspire the G20 in staying ahead of the curve of the world economy. Jointly moving the world economy forward on the right track is the founding mission and the primary task of the G20. We need to strengthen macro policy coordination and cooperation, and more importantly, we need to unequivocally uphold the multilateral trading system and build an open world economy. 
希望二十国集团继续促进经济全球化发展进程。马克里总统倡导二十国集团要本着“以人民为中心”的指导思想开展合作，中方对此高度赞赏。经济全球化为世界经济增长提供了强劲动力，促进了商品和资本流动、科技和文明进步、各国人民交往。对经济全球化进程中出现的问题，我们要主动作为、适度管理，从构建人类命运共同体出发，践行共商共建共享理念，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢方向发展，确保所有国家和人民都能受益。
We hope the G20 will continue to advance the process of economic globalization. China highly commends the people-centered vision for G20 cooperation as championed by President Macri. Economic globalization has provided a robust driving force for global growth and enabled flows of goods and capital, advances in science and technology, progress of civilizations, and interactions between people of different countries. As for the problems that have arisen in this process, we need to take a proactive and measured approach, act in the interest of building a community with a shared future for mankind, and pursue a more open, inclusive and balanced economic globalization in line with the principle of consultation, collaboration and benefit for all in order to serve the interests of people of all countries. 
希望二十国集团继续引领创新增长、长效治理的发展路径。新技术、新业态带来的机遇和挑战并存。各国需要继续通过创新挖掘世界经济增长新动力，推动数字经济、新工业革命深入发展，也要关注创新给社会就业带来的风险挑战，增强劳动者适应技术变革的能力。我们要继续把发展问题置于全球宏观政策协调的突出位置，讨论各领域国际合作都要始终纳入发展视角，照顾发展中国家关切，维护发展中国家发展空间。我们要支持基础设施互联互通建设，帮助发展中国家突破发展瓶颈，实现可持续发展。
We hope the G20 will continue to take the lead in shaping paths toward innovation-driven growth and long-term governance. New technologies and new forms of business have created both opportunities and challenges. Countries need to foster new drivers for global growth through innovation, and build up the momentum of the digital economy and the new industrial revolution. As innovation may cause risks and challenges for employment, it is important to better equip our workers with the capacity to adapt to technological transformation. We need to continue to put development front and center in global macro policy coordination, and keep in mind the need for development throughout our discussions of international cooperation in all areas. The concerns of developing countries should be accommodated and their development space preserved. Efforts should be made to support infrastructure connectivity and help developing countries break growth bottlenecks and achieve sustainable development.
52. 习近平在阿联酋媒体发表署名文章《携手前行，共创未来》
携手前行，共创未来 
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Working Hand in Hand for a Better Future 
Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
应哈利法总统邀请，我将于7月19日对阿拉伯联合酋长国进行国事访问。这是我今年首次出访的第一站，也是我再次当选中国国家主席后访问的第一个阿拉伯国家。
I will pay a state visit to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) on July 19th at the invitation of President Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan. The UAE will be the first stop of my first overseas trip this year and also the first Arab state I will visit since my re-election as President of the People's Republic of China.
中阿两国人民友谊源远流长。早在2000多年前，我们的祖先就通过古代丝绸之路互通有无、相知相交。7世纪，双方又打通了海上贸易往来通道，中国的丝绸、瓷器销往阿拉伯半岛、东非、欧洲，阿拉伯香料和珍珠也登船经印度洋前往中国。
The friendship between the peoples of China and the UAE dates back to ancient times. Our ancestors started trade through the ancient Silk Road well over 2,000 years ago and forged a friendship that remains vibrant to this day. With the opening of trade routes at sea in the 7th century, Chinese silk and porcelain were marketed to the Arabian Peninsula, East Africa and Europe while Arab spices and pearls were brought to Asia through the Indian Ocean.
1984年中国同阿联酋建交，掀开了交往合作的崭新篇章。过去的34年，是两国传统友好深化发展、民间往来迸发涌流的活跃时期，中国人民不会忘记2008年中国四川汶川特大地震发生后，阿联酋政府捐款5000万美元所体现出的患难真情。过去的34年，是两国快速发展、在欧亚大陆两端创造发展奇迹的时期，如今中国已成长为世界经济增长的重要引擎，阿联酋也成为阿拉伯世界的发展绿洲。过去的34年，是两国探索适合自身国情发展道路的时期，两国在加速迈向现代化的同时都保持了自身独立性。两国发展理念相近，政策目标相通，合作纽带越来越紧，已成为发展建设中优势互补的真诚朋友，沟通协调国际和地区事务的重要伙伴。
In 1984, China and the UAE established diplomatic ties, opening a new chapter in the bilateral exchanges and cooperation.
The past 34 years have seen a most dynamic growth of China-UAE traditional friendship and people-to-people exchanges. In the wake of the deadly earthquakes in 2008 which devastated Wenchuan in China's Sichuan Province, the UAE government donated 50 million U.S. dollars. The Chinese people will always remember the solidarity and compassion that came from the UAE.
The past 34 years have seen a robust expansion of our economies in a development miracle occurring on both ends of the Eurasian continent. China has emerged as a strong driving force for world economic growth and the UAE has become an oasis of development for the Arab world.
The past 34 years have also seen a fruitful effort of our two nations each to explore a development path befitting our respective circumstances. In the process of an accelerated modernization drive, our independence has remained intact. The development philosophies and policy objectives of our countries are similar. Our bonds of cooperation are growing stronger. China and the UAE have become bosom friends who help and complement each other, and important partners who always communicate and coordinate with each other on regional and international affairs.
2012年，阿联酋成为首个同中国建立战略伙伴关系的海湾阿拉伯国家，双边合作快速发展，内涵更加丰富。特别是2015年12月，阿布扎比王储穆罕默德访华，我们就发展中阿关系达成重要共识，引领两国友好合作取得了一系列标志性成就。
In 2012, China and the UAE established a strategic partnership. The UAE is the first Gulf state to have done so with China. Thanks to the strategic partnership, our bilateral cooperation has embarked on a fast track and covered more areas. What should be specially mentioned is the visit to China by Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan of Abu Dhabi in December 2015. During his visit, the Crown Prince and I reached an important consensus on the way forward for a stronger relationship between the two countries. China-UAE friendly cooperation has since made landmark achievements.
——能源合作延伸到上游。2017年，阿方将阿布扎比陆上石油区块共计12%的特许经营权授予中国企业，这是中国在中东产油国首次获得上游合作份额。2018年3月，阿方又将阿布扎比海上石油区块所属2个油田各10%的特许经营权授予中国企业。
-- Our upstream energy cooperation is off to a good start. In 2017, the UAE awarded Chinese companies a combined 12 percent stakes in Abu Dhabi's onshore oil concession, the first time for China to acquire stakes in upstream cooperation in an oil-producing country in the Middle East. In March 2018, the UAE awarded a Chinese entity another 10 percent stake in each of the two offshore concessions in Abu Dhabi.
——产能合作迈出历史性步伐。中阿联合建设运营的哈利法港二期集装箱码头项目将于2019年第一季度投入运营，年处理能力240万标准箱。设在哈利法港临港工业区的中阿产能合作示范园进展良好，目前共有16家企业签署入园意向协议，投资总额约64亿元人民币。
-- Our industrial capacity cooperation has made historic progress. The Khalifa Port Container Terminal Two, a project jointly built and operated by Chinese and UAE companies with a designed annual capacity of 2.4 million TEUs, will be up and running in the first quarter of 2019. The China-UAE Industrial Capacity Cooperation Demonstration Zone located in the Khalifa Industrial Zone has made good progress. As things stand now, 16 enterprises have signed letters of intent with a committed investment of 6.4 billion yuan.
——高新领域合作逐步兴起。中阿合作建设中的迪拜700兆瓦光热发电项目是世界上规模最大、技术最先进的光热发电站；作为丝路基金在中东的首单投资，哈斯彦清洁煤电站建成后也将是中东首个清洁燃煤电站。
-- Our new and high technology cooperation is on the rise. The 700-MW Concentrated Solar Power (CSP), a China-UAE joint project, is under construction in Dubai. It will be the world's largest and most advanced solar thermal power plant. The Hassyan Clean Coal Power Plant, the first Middle East project financed by the Silk Road Fund, will be the first clean coal plant in the region upon completion.
——金融合作深入开展。2015年12月，两国央行续签本币互换协议，签署在阿联酋建立人民币清算安排合作备忘录，并同意将人民币合格境外机构投资者试点扩大到阿联酋。中阿共同投资基金已完成12个项目、总额10.7亿美元的投资决策。
-- Our financial cooperation is growing in depth. In December 2015, the central banks of our two countries renewed their currency swap agreement and signed an MOU on RMB clearing arrangements in the UAE. The two central banks also agreed to expand the RMB Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors (RQFII) pilot area to the UAE. The China-UAE Joint Investment Fund has finalized its plans for investment in 12 projects valued at 1.07 billion U.S. dollars.
——人文交流蓬勃发展。阿联酋成为中国公民首站旅游人数最多的中东阿拉伯国家，2017年，中国赴阿联酋游客数量首次突破100万人次，在阿联酋过境游客约350万人次。2017年，阿联酋在中东国家中率先获得持普通护照公民赴华免签待遇。阿联酋“青年大使”项目迄今已成功举办6届中国行活动，百余名阿联酋青年精英赴华交流参访。
-- Our people-to-people and cultural exchanges are multiplying. The UAE is now the most favored first stop for Chinese tourists traveling to Arab destinations in the Middle East. In 2017, the number of Chinese tourist arrivals in the UAE exceeded the mark of one million for the first time in history, and about 3.5 million Chinese tourists transited through the UAE. Starting from 2017, UAE citizens traveling on ordinary passports may visit China visa-free. The UAE is the first Middle East country to have been granted such visa-exemption treatment by China. Moreover, the UAE Youth Ambassadors Program has organized six China tours for over 100 young people from the UAE.
新的征程需要果敢的引领者，新的使命需要勇毅的担当者。我在2014年面向阿拉伯世界提出共建“一带一路”倡议，得到所有阿拉伯国家热烈响应。阿布扎比王储穆罕默德更是富有远见地回应说：“在以新的丝绸之路这一现代方式加强中国同阿拉伯世界沟通的桥梁上，我们有着共同的抱负。这一合作框架之所以必要，是因为尽管我们的关系已取得了快速发展，但我们的雄心远高于此。”
A new journey needs leaders with strong resolve. A new mission needs people with strong commitment. In 2014, I called on the Arab world to join in Belt and Road cooperation. The Arab states responded favorably to my invitation. The Crown Prince Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan of Abu Dhabi noted in his visionary statement that we share the aspiration of building stronger ties between the Arab world and China in such a modern way as the new Silk Road, and that the cooperation under this framework is highly necessary because we have far greater ambitions, albeit the rapid growth of our bilateral relations.
共建“一带一路”植根于古丝绸之路的历史土壤，顺应阿拉伯国家推进经济多元化和工业化的发展需求。我期待通过这次访问，同阿联酋领导人一道描绘合作蓝图，释放合作潜力，为中阿关系提挡加速，打造中阿共建“一带一路”命运共同体，更好造福两国人民。
Belt and Road cooperation is rooted in the history of the ancient Silk Road and dovetails with the development needs of Arab states, especially their economic diversification and industrialization. I look forward to working with the UAE leaders to draw up a blueprint for China-UAE cooperation so as to unlock its full potentials and advance China-UAE relations at a higher level and speed and build a China-UAE community of shared future in Belt and Road cooperation. Hopefully we will be able to deliver more tangible benefits to our two peoples through these endeavors.
我希望，两国携起手来：
To this end, I hope that our two countries will work hand in hand as:
——做真诚互信的战略伙伴。当今世界正处在大发展大变革大调整时期，中阿应该加强沟通和协调，维护和拓展双方在国际和地区事务中的共同利益，为促进世界和平、稳定、繁荣贡献正能量。
-- Strategic partners who truly trust each other. Given the unprecedented development, transformation and adjustment the world is undergoing, China and the UAE need to strengthen their communication and coordination, safeguard and expand their common interests in regional and international affairs, and jointly contribute to world peace, stability and prosperity.
——做共赢共享的合作伙伴。中阿应该在共建“一带一路”框架内加强政策沟通，加快融合发展，共同维护多边贸易体制，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
-- Collaborative partners who pursue win-win outcomes and mutual benefits. Under the framework of Belt and Road cooperation, China and the UAE need to strengthen policy communication, speed up integrated development, uphold the multilateral trading system, and see that economic globalization is more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
——做互学互鉴的交往伙伴。中阿应该加强文化、教育、旅游、青年、媒体等领域合作，做不同宗教、不同文明对话互鉴的桥梁。中方将在阿布扎比开设中国文化中心，支持并参与迪拜在2020年举办中东地区首届世博会。
-- Interactive partners who learn from each other. China and the UAE need to deepen cooperation in culture, education, tourism, youth, media and other areas, and promote dialogue and mutual learning between religions and civilizations. In this connection, China will open a Chinese culture center in Abu Dhabi. China will support and participate in Expo 2020 Dubai, which will be the first Expo held in the Middle East.
——做实践先行的创新伙伴。我们是敢为人先、追求卓越的民族，中方正在实施创新驱动发展战略，阿联酋也在推进“国家创新战略”、“2050能源战略”、“第四次工业革命六大支柱设想”，双方可以同向发力、相互促进，在更多高新技术领域寻求合作突破。
-- Innovative partners who champion result-oriented actions. Both our nations are known for a trail-blazing spirit and pursuit of excellence. China is implementing its innovation-driven development strategy, and the UAE is acting on its National Innovation Strategy, Energy Strategy 2050 and a six-pillar plan for the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Our two countries may work in concert to seek new breakthroughs in new- and high-tech cooperation.
时代潮流滚滚向前，世界发展常变常新。中阿两国虽然相距遥远、国情千差万别，但都拥有极具奋斗精神、创造精神、追梦精神的人民。我曾说过，“中国人民自古就明白，世界上没有坐享其成的好事，要幸福就要奋斗”。阿联酋“国父”扎耶德总统也说过，“为国家带来进步的不仅仅是石油，还有这个国家人民所作出的努力”。只要两国人民共同支持和参与，就一定能够创造两国合作共赢新历史，为我们共同的世界、共同的未来作出更大贡献。
As time marches on, the world changes and evolves into a new one. Our two countries are geographically far apart and different in national conditions. But we are both proud to have an enterprising and creative people who never give up their dreams.
I once said, we Chinese have realized since the beginning of our nation that there is no such a thing as sitting idle and enjoying all the benefits. Happiness is to be earned through hard work. Similarly, the founding father of the UAE, His Highness President Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, aptly noted that oil alone cannot bring progress to a country and that it must be combined with the hard work of its people. I am convinced that with the support and participation of our two peoples, we will be able to make history with our mutually-beneficial cooperation and contribute more to the world and the future that we share.
28. 习近平在吉尔吉斯斯坦媒体发表署名文章《愿中吉友谊之树枝繁叶茂、四季常青》
愿中吉友谊之树枝繁叶茂、四季常青
May China-Kyrgyzstan Friendship Thrive Like an Evergreen Tree
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
六月的天山繁花似锦，绿草如茵。在这个美好季节，应热恩别科夫总统邀请，我即将对吉尔吉斯斯坦进行第二次国事访问，并出席上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议。6年前，我首次访问美丽的吉尔吉斯斯坦，同吉方共叙友谊、共商合作、共话未来，开启中吉战略伙伴关系新时代。6年后，我欣喜地看到，两国关系已提升至全面战略伙伴关系。中吉友好合作事业正如仲夏时节的山川草原，充满生机和活力。
Strewn with blooming flowers and lush grass, the Tianshan Mountains offer an enchanting view at this time of the year. I am pleased that in such a lovely season, I will come to Kyrgyzstan at the kind invitation of President Sooronbay Jeenbekov to make my second state visit and attend the 19th Meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). I first visited this beautiful country six years ago. The discussions I had with Kyrgyz leaders on the friendship and cooperation between our two countries and on the future growth of the China-Kyrgyzstan relationship ushered this relationship into a new era of strategic partnership. Now six years on, it is heartening to see that this relationship has been upgraded further to a comprehensive strategic partnership, and that our friendship and cooperation are brimming with vigor and vitality like the mountains and grasslands in the prime of summer.
中吉两国人民比邻而居，传统友好源远流长。2000多年前，中国汉代张骞远行西域，古丝绸之路逶迤穿过碎叶古城。数百年后，黠戛斯人跋涉千里远赴唐都长安，返程不仅带回了精美的丝绸和瓷器，也收获了亲切友爱的兄弟般情谊。中国唐代伟大诗人李白的绚丽诗篇在两国家喻户晓、广为传诵。2000多年的历史积淀，铸就了两国人民牢不可破的深情厚谊。
The people of China and Kyrgyzstan are close neighbors sharing a long tradition of friendship. More than 2,000 years ago, Zhang Qian, the imperial envoy of China's Han Dynasty, traveled west and extended the ancient Silk Road to Central Asia via the ancient city of Suyab (near present-day Tokmok). That visit was reciprocated several hundred years later by Kyrgyz envoys trudging all the way to Chang'an, the capital of the Tang Dynasty. On their return trip, they brought back not only exquisite silk and porcelain but also a brotherly friendship. The great poet Li Bai, living some 1,300 years ago in the Tang Dynasty, is a household name in our two countries and his poems are widely quoted by the Chinese and Kyrgyz alike. In the course of over two millennia, interactions like these have forged an unbreakable bond of amity between our peoples.
建交以来，中吉关系经受住了国际风云变幻考验，两国风雨同舟、守望相助，是名副其实的好邻居、好朋友、好伙伴、好兄弟，在国际社会树立了相互尊重、平等合作、互利共赢的新型国家关系典范。
Since the establishment of diplomatic ties, China-Kyrgyzstan relations have withstood the vicissitudes of the international landscape. The solidarity and mutual assistance that we have demonstrated in times of difficulty have proven that we are good neighbors, good friends, good partners, and good brothers. As a fine example of a new type of state-to-state relations featuring mutual respect, equality and win-win cooperation, the China-Kyrgyzstan relationship is defined by the following features:
——中吉政治互信日益牢固。建交后不久，双方就彻底解决了历史遗留的边界问题，中吉1000多公里的共同边界成为连接两国人民的纽带。当前，中吉关系不存在任何悬而未决的问题，双方在涉及彼此核心利益的问题上相互坚定支持。中方坚定支持吉尔吉斯斯坦人民根据本国国情自主选择发展道路，坚定支持吉尔吉斯斯坦政府为维护国家独立、主权、领土完整所采取的各项政策措施。吉方也在台湾、涉疆、打击“三股势力”等问题上一贯给予中方坚定支持和有力配合。
-- Stronger mutual political trust. Shortly after the establishment of diplomatic ties, we found lasting solutions to all boundary issues left from history, turning the 1,000-km border line into a true bond of friendship between our peoples. Having no outstanding issues in our bilateral ties, we firmly support each other on issues concerning each other's core interests. China strongly supports the Kyrgyz people's independent choice of a development path suited to their national realities, and all policy measures taken by the Kyrgyz government to safeguard national independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. Likewise, Kyrgyzstan has rendered China full support and cooperation on issues related to Taiwan, Xinjiang and the fight against terrorism, separatism and extremism.
——中吉务实合作不断深入。吉尔吉斯斯坦是最早支持和参与共建“一带一路”的国家之一，双方在经贸、能源、基础设施建设、互联互通等领域取得了一批重要合作成果。中国已成为吉尔吉斯斯坦第一大贸易伙伴国和投资来源国。2018年，中吉双边贸易额超过56亿美元，同建交之初相比增长超过150倍。中方累计对吉尔吉斯斯坦投资近30亿美元。双方共同实施的达特卡－克明输变电工程结束了吉尔吉斯斯坦电力资源分布不均、输送不畅的历史，奥什市医院为当地民众提供中亚地区最优质的医疗服务，中吉乌（兹别克斯坦）公路成为跨越高山、畅通无阻的国际运输大动脉。吉尔吉斯斯坦不断扩大对华出口，蜂蜜、水果等绿色、优质农产品已经走上中国普通百姓的餐桌。吉尔吉斯斯坦民众喜爱网购，电商为他们提供了全新的消费体验。
-- Deepening results-oriented cooperation. Kyrgyzstan is one of the earliest supporters and participants of Belt and Road cooperation, and major outcomes have been achieved through our cooperation in economy and trade, energy, infrastructure development and connectivity. China has become Kyrgyzstan's top trading partner and source of investment, with bilateral trade exceeding 5.6 billion U.S. dollars in 2018, a 150-fold increase from the early days of diplomatic engagement, and cumulative Chinese investment in Kyrgyzstan approaching 3 billion dollars. Thanks to the Datka-Kemin power transmission and transformation project jointly undertaken by our two countries, uneven power distribution and patchy supply have become a thing of the past in Kyrgyzstan; the Osh Hospital is providing the local community with the best medical services in Central Asia; and the China-Kyrgyzstan-Uzbekistan highway, defying the many high mountains on its route, has become a transnational transport artery. As Kyrgyzstan continues to increase its export to China, green and quality Kyrgyz agro-products like honey and fruits can be found more often in ordinary Chinese households. Similarly, many Kyrgyz people have taken to online shopping, as e-commerce platforms give them a shopping experience like never before.
——中吉人文交流更加热络。2018年，两国人员往来超过7万人次，吉尔吉斯斯坦在华留学生超过4600名。吉尔吉斯斯坦开设4所孔子学院和21个孔子课堂，中方援建的比什凯克第九十五中学成为当地最受欢迎的学校。中吉两国共同举办纪念吉尔吉斯斯坦著名作家艾特玛托夫诞辰90周年系列活动，社会各界反响热烈。应热恩别科夫总统邀请，中国中央歌剧院将赴吉尔吉斯斯坦演出中文歌剧《玛纳斯》。这一两国人民共同拥有的文化瑰宝再次大放异彩，奏响中吉传统友好的时代强音。
-- Closer people-to-people exchanges. In 2018, more than 70,000 people traveled between our two countries and over 4,600 Kyrgyz students were studying in China. Four Confucius Institutes and 21 Confucius Classrooms are operating in Kyrgyzstan, and the Bishkek No. 95 Middle School built with Chinese assistance has become the most popular school in the local area. Commemorative events have been jointly hosted by our two sides for the 90th anniversary of the birth of the celebrated Kyrgyz writer Chingiz Aytmatov, receiving enthusiastic responses from various quarters. At the invitation of President Jeenbekov, the China National Opera House will present a Chinese opera Manas in Kyrgyzstan. I believe this new rendition of our shared cultural heritage will wow the audience and help renew the friendship between China and Kyrgyzstan in this new era.
吉尔吉斯斯坦有句谚语，“兄弟情谊胜过一切财富。”中国人也常说，“兄弟同心，其利断金。”当今世界正面临百年未有之大变局，中吉携手合作，共迎挑战，确保两国关系持续稳定健康发展，是历史赋予我们的责任。我期待通过这次访问，同热恩别科夫总统一道，擘画中吉全面战略伙伴关系未来发展宏伟蓝图，引领两国关系和各领域合作再上新台阶。
As a Kyrgyz saying goes, "Brotherhood is more valuable than all the wealth in the world." Likewise, the Chinese often say, "When brothers are of the same mind, they can cut metal through." In a world undergoing changes unseen in a century, it is important for China and Kyrgyzstan to join hands and meet challenges together to ensure the sustained, steady and healthy growth of our bilateral relations. That is a historical responsibility we share. On my forthcoming visit, I look forward to working with President Jeenbekov to draw up an ambitious blueprint for China-Kyrgyzstan comprehensive strategic partnership and bring our bilateral ties and all-round cooperation to a new height.
我们愿同吉方增进战略互信，密切高层交往，加强政府、议会、政党、地方各层级交流合作，继续在主权、安全、领土完整等涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互坚定支持，在风云激荡的国际局势中携手并肩，捍卫两国共同的战略安全和发展利益，为实现两国繁荣富强共同奋斗。
China wants to enhance strategic trust with Kyrgyzstan. We will increase high-level exchanges and step up interactions and cooperation at various levels between our governments, legislatures, political parties and local authorities. We will continue to give each other firm support on sovereignty, security, territorial integrity and other issues concerning each other's core interests. We will work together amid a fast-changing global landscape to advance our common strategic security and development interests and achieve prosperity of our two nations.
我们愿同吉方深化共建“一带一路”合作，加快推进发展战略对接，共同落实第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成果，深化农业、基础设施建设、互联互通等领域合作，促进贸易投资便利化。我们欢迎吉尔吉斯斯坦企业继续积极参加中国国际进口博览会，愿进口更多高品质的吉尔吉斯斯坦农产品。我们也将继续为吉尔吉斯斯坦经济发展和民生改善提供力所能及的帮助和支持。
China wants to deepen Belt and Road cooperation with Kyrgyzstan. Specifically, we will push for greater complementarity between our development strategies, work on the follow-ups to the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, deepen cooperation in such areas as agriculture, infrastructure development and connectivity, and promote trade and investment facilitation. China welcomes the active participation of Kyrgyz companies in the China International Import Expo and stands ready to buy more quality agricultural produce from Kyrgyzstan. In addition, China will continue to do what it can to help and support Kyrgyzstan in its effort to grow its economy and better the lives of its people.
我们愿同吉方加强安全合作，践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，合力打击“三股势力”、贩毒、跨国有组织犯罪，维护两国人民生命财产安全，共同营造地区和谐稳定的安全环境。
China wants to strengthen security cooperation with Kyrgyzstan. We will follow the vision for common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security in our joint fight against terrorism, separatism and extremism and against drug-trafficking and transnational organized crime to protect the life and property of our people and foster a regional security environment defined by harmony and stability.
我们愿同吉方扩大人文交流。朋友越走越近，邻居越走越亲。双方要提升教育、科技、文化、卫生、青年、媒体、联合考古等领域合作水平，让两国人民心更近、情更深。
China wants to expand people-to-people exchanges with Kyrgyzstan. Affinity between friends and neighbors grows as exchange of visits increases. Our two sides need to elevate our cooperation in education, science and technology, culture, health, youth, media and joint archaeological exploration in a bid to bring our two peoples closer to each other.
我们愿同吉方密切国际合作，加强在联合国、上海合作组织、亚信等多边框架内的沟通和协调，共同维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际关系基本准则，支持多边主义，推进经济全球化进程，推动构建新型国际关系和人类命运共同体。
China wants to step up international cooperation with Kyrgyzstan. We will strengthen communication and coordination at the United Nations, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA) and other multilateral frameworks, uphold basic norms governing international relations based on the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, support multilateralism, advance economic globalization, and promote a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
上海合作组织成立18年来，成员国秉持互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”，坚定遵循《上海合作组织宪章》和《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》确定的宗旨和原则，树立了相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系典范，为促进地区稳定和繁荣发挥了不可替代的重要作用。
Over the past 18 years since the inception of the SCO, members have followed the Shanghai Spirit of mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations, and pursuit of common development, and observed the purposes and principles enshrined in the SCO Charter and the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation Between the Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. As a result, the SCO has served as a good example of a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness and justice, and win-win cooperation, and played an irreplaceable role in promoting stability and prosperity in our region.
上海合作组织高度重视安全、经济、人文、对外交往等领域合作，严厉打击“三股势力”，着力深化共建“一带一路”同各国发展战略和地区合作倡议对接，不断加强贸易、投资、互联互通、能源、创新、人文等领域合作，大力拓展同观察员国、对话伙伴以及联合国等国际组织的伙伴关系，致力于打造更加紧密的上海合作组织命运共同体。
The SCO has prioritized cooperation in security, economy, people-to-people exchanges, and outreach to non-SCO members. It has taken tough measures to crack down on terrorism, separatism and extremism. With a focus on deepening the synergy between Belt and Road cooperation, development strategies of individual countries, and regional cooperation initiatives, the SCO has kept scaling up cooperation in trade, investment, connectivity, energy, innovation and people-to-people exchanges. It has also been expanding partnerships with observer states, dialogue partners, and international organizations like the United Nations. All these efforts have contributed to our vision of a closer SCO community with a shared future.
吉尔吉斯斯坦担任上海合作组织轮值主席国以来，为推动本组织发展做了大量卓有成效的工作。相信在各方共同努力下，比什凯克峰会将取得丰硕成果，推动上海合作组织得到更大发展，更好造福地区各国人民。
Since assuming the SCO presidency, Kyrgyzstan has made a great deal of productive efforts for the further development of this organization. I am convinced that, with the collective efforts of all sides, the Bishkek Summit will produce fruitful results, bring about greater development of the SCO, and deliver even more benefits to the people across the region.
只要我们秉持世代友好，矢志不渝推进合作，中吉友好事业必将如巍巍天山上苍劲挺拔的雪岭云杉，枝繁叶茂、四季常青。
I believe that as long as we stay committed to our longstanding amity and cooperation, the friendship between China and Kyrgyzstan will endure and thrive like the mighty, evergreen spruce trees on the majestic Tianshan Mountains.
27. 习近平在塔吉克斯坦媒体发表署名文章《携手共铸中塔友好新辉煌》
携手共铸中塔友好新辉煌
Working Together for a Brighter Future of China-Tajikistan Friendship
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China 
“到处野芳红胜锦，满川新涨碧于银”。在这个生机盎然的仲夏时节，应拉赫蒙总统邀请，我即将对友好的塔吉克斯坦进行国事访问。5年前，我第一次访问塔吉克斯坦，这里壮美多姿的山川、悠久绚烂的文化、热情淳朴的人民给我留下美好而深刻的印象。即将再次踏上这片古老的土地，见到热情好客的塔吉克斯坦朋友，我充满期待。
"The landscape is dotted with red flowers like brocade and glittering rivers like silver," a Chinese envoy wrote this line when traveling in Central Asia in the early 15th century. In this lovely season of mid-summer, I am delighted to pay a state visit to the Republic of Tajikistan at the invitation of President Emomali Rahmon. When I was first in your friendly country five years ago, I was greatly impressed by its majestic mountains, splendid culture and warm-hearted people. So I am very much looking forward to returning to Tajikistan, a land steeped in history, and meeting friends whose hospitality always makes me feel at home.
中国和塔吉克斯坦山水相连，两国人民友好交往源远流长。2000多年前，中国西汉张骞凿空西域之旅，开辟了伟大的丝绸之路，在人类文明交流史上留下了华美乐章。两国先民互通有无，互学互鉴。在中亚这片广袤土地上，大唐玄奘、明朝陈诚都留下了友好足迹，索莫尼、鲁达基等塔吉克斯坦历史文化名人的故事也在中华大地传颂，粟特人多姿的身影成为唐三彩骆驼载乐俑的主角。历经千百年积淀，两国人民友谊如同巍峨屹立的帕米尔高原，不因风云变幻而动摇，不随时代变迁而改变。
China and Tajikistan are close neighbors connected by mountains and rivers and a lasting bond of friendship between our peoples. More than 2,000 years ago, a Chinese imperial envoy named Zhang Qian traveled through harsh terrain to Central Asia. He pioneered what became known as the Silk Road, which saw flourishing interactions between various civilizations. Through the Silk Road, the forebears of our two nations exchanged goods and ideas and learned a great deal from each other. Xuan Zang, an eminent 7th century monk, and Chen Cheng, who wrote the poem I quoted earlier, traveled to Central Asia as Chinese envoys of friendship. The life stories of your historical and literary figures, such as Emir Ismail Samani and the famous poet Rudaki, are widely known in China. Sogdian musicians and dancers are prominently featured in the glazed potteries from China's Tang Dynasty (A.D. 618-907) preserved to this day. Through many centuries, the friendship of our two peoples has stood the test of time and external vicissitudes. It is as solid as the awe-inspiring Pamirs.
27年前，中国率先承认塔吉克斯坦独立，两国建立外交关系，中塔人民友好焕发出新的勃勃生机。27年来，中塔两国始终相互信任、彼此尊重，在各领域开展了互利合作，在国际社会树立了不同制度、不同文明、不同规模国家友好合作的典范。
When Tajikistan gained independence 27 years ago, China was among the very first to recognize it. The inauguration of diplomatic ties enabled dynamic interactions between our peoples. Throughout these 27 years, our two countries have trusted and respected each other and engaged in cooperation for mutual benefit. Together, we have set a fine example of friendship and cooperation between countries different in system, culture and size.
——平等互信使中塔友好稳如磐石。中国古人说，“与朋友交，言而有信”。互信是中塔全面战略伙伴关系的基石。正是基于互信，中塔成功解决历史遗留的边界问题，495公里的共同边界成为连接中塔人民友谊的桥梁和纽带。双方在涉及彼此核心利益的重大问题上始终相互理解、相互支持。中塔已成为山水相连的好邻居、真诚互信的好朋友、合作共赢的好伙伴、彼此扶持的好兄弟。
Based on trust and equality, China-Tajikistan friendship is rock solid. An ancient Chinese philosopher once noted, "In interactions with friends, one should keep his word and always be trustworthy." Mutual trust is at the heart of the comprehensive strategic partnership between China and Tajikistan. It has enabled us to successfully resolve the boundary issue left from the past, thus turning our 495-kilometer common border into a bond of friendship. On major issues that affect our respective core interests, we can always count on each other's understanding and support. Indeed, our two countries are good neighbors linked by mountains and rivers, good friends who trust each other with all sincerity, good partners engaged in win-win cooperation and good brothers who support each other all the time.
——互利共赢使中塔友好充满活力。中塔共建“一带一路”合作走在前列。塔吉克斯坦第一个同中国签署共建丝绸之路经济带合作备忘录，成立合作委员会，双方共同实施了一系列具有标志性的大型合作项目。亚湾－瓦赫达特铁路桥隧道的贯通，使塔吉克斯坦南北相隔的铁路变成通途；杜尚别热电厂的建成，让塔吉克斯坦首都冬季缺电成为了历史；中央直辖区500千伏输变电线的竣工，提升了塔吉克斯坦北部电网稳定性和安全性。水泥厂、炼油厂、农业纺织产业园、矿业冶炼工业园等项目顺利实施，成为塔吉克斯坦工业化的加速器。中国已成为塔吉克斯坦最大投资来源国和主要贸易伙伴。未来几年，中塔贸易额将突破30亿美元。实践表明，中塔两国已携手走出一条优势互补、共谋发展、共享繁荣的道路。
Driven by mutual benefit, China-Tajikistan friendship is full of dynamism. Tajikistan is one of China's closest partners in Belt and Road cooperation. It was the first to sign a cooperation MOU with China on the Silk Road Economic Belt. A dedicated committee has since been established and a number of signature projects already completed. The Vahdat-Yavan railway has been completed along with bridges and tunnels, connecting the previously separated railways in southern and northern Tajikistan. The construction of a thermal power plant in Dushanbe has made winter brown-outs in the capital city a thing of the past. The 500-kilowatt high-voltage transmission line through the Districts of Republican Subordination has made the power grid in northern Tajikistan more stable and safer. Other projects, such as cement plants, an oil refinery, an agriculture and textile park and a smeltering and industrial park, have helped to fuel the industrialization of Tajikistan. China is now the biggest source of investment and a major trading partner for Tajikistan. In a few years, our two-way trade is expected to surpass 3 billion U.S. dollars. All of these are prime examples of our two countries pursuing shared prosperity on the basis of mutual complementarity.
——民心相通使中塔友好世代相传。“汉语热”、“塔吉克斯坦热”已在两国蔚然成风。中国多所大学开设了塔吉克语专业和塔吉克斯坦研究中心，两所孔子学院和两所孔子课堂在塔吉克斯坦开展汉语教学工作。不久前，拉赫蒙总统所著《历史倒影中的塔吉克民族》中文版在华出版发行，为中国人民了解塔吉克斯坦提供了新视角。上个月，“塔吉克斯坦文化节”在北京和西安两地成功举行，让中国人民再次领略了塔吉克斯坦文化的魅力。两国人民像走亲戚一样常来常往，世代友好更加深入人心。
Strengthened by people-to-people ties, China-Tajikistan friendship is sure to last from generation to generation. The Chinese language is gaining popularity here, while the Chinese people are increasingly attracted to this country. Several Chinese universities have introduced courses on the Tajik language or set up centers on Tajikistan studies, and Mandarin is being taught in the two Confucius Institutes and two Confucius Classrooms hosted by Tajikistan. A few weeks ago, the Chinese version of President Rahmon's book, The Tajiks in the Mirror of History, was published in China, giving the Chinese people new insights into Tajikistan. Last month, "Tajikistan Cultural Day" events were successfully held in Beijing and Xi'an, introducing Tajik culture to a larger Chinese audience. Our two peoples are visiting each other as frequently as relatives do, further strengthening the foundation of our lasting friendship.
当今世界正面临百年未有之大变局，和平与发展仍然是时代主题，但保护主义、单边主义肆意横行，地区形势中的不确定因素增多。中塔全面战略伙伴关系发展既面临难得的历史机遇，也面临前所未有的复杂挑战。中方愿同塔方携手合作，把好机遇，共迎挑战。
We live in a world of profound changes unseen in a century. Although peace and development remain the theme of the times, we are also witnessing rampant protectionism and unilateralism and rising uncertainty in various regions. This presents to the China-Tajikistan comprehensive strategic partnership both valuable opportunities for development and challenges more complex than ever. China stands ready to work with Tajikistan to fully leverage the opportunities and overcome the challenges together.
我们要深化政策沟通，从战略高度和长远角度对中塔关系发展作好顶层设计。密切高层交往，加强政府、议会、政党、地方各级别合作，继续在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互给予坚定支持，夯实中塔关系行稳致远的政治基础。
We need to deepen policy communication and devise master plans for developing China-Tajikistan relations from a strategic and long-term perspective. More frequent exchanges at the top level will be helpful, as well as closer cooperation between our governments, parliaments and political parties and at sub-national levels. We need to continue to give each other firm support on issues that touch our respective core interests and major concerns, with a view to consolidating the political foundation of China-Tajikistan relations for its enduring, steady growth.
我们要绘制共建“一带一路”的工笔画，在平等互利的基础上拓展合作空间，以战略性大项目为重点，优先发展能源、交通、农业、工业等领域合作，持续扩大贸易投资，欢迎通过中国国际进口博览会等平台扩大对华出口，构建内容丰富、成效显著、惠泽民众的务实合作格局。
We need to refine our blueprint for Belt and Road cooperation. We need to expand our cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, focus on strategic projects, and give priority to cooperation in energy, transportation, agriculture and industry. Trade and investment need to be continuously scaled up, and Tajikistan is more than welcome to increase exports to China through the China International Import Expo and other platforms. Our two countries must strive to build an architecture of practical cooperation that has rich substance and delivers tangible benefits to the people.
我们要推进民心相通，深化语言教学、名著互译、考古发掘、文物保护、影视制作等方面合作，让中塔两个悠久文明在交流融汇中更加多彩。我们要在青少年心中播撒友谊种子，培养两国友好事业接班人，让中塔友好薪火相传。
We need to forge a stronger people-to-people bond. By deepening cooperation in language education, translation of classics, archaeological excavation, cultural heritage protection, and film and TV program production, we can better draw on what our two ancient civilizations have to offer each other. Seeds of friendship must be sown among our young people, so that the torch of China-Tajikistan friendship will be passed to future generations.
我们要全力深化打击“三股势力”和跨国有组织犯罪、禁毒、网络安全等领域合作，更好维护两国和本地区安全稳定。
We need to do all we can to deepen cooperation on fighting the three forces of terrorism, separatism and extremism as well as transnational organized crime, and on narcotics control and cybersecurity, thus providing greater security and stability for both our countries and our region.
我们要加强在国际事务中的战略协作，深化在联合国、上海合作组织、亚信等多边平台的协调配合，维护多边主义和自由贸易体制，反对单边主义和霸凌行径，为推动全球治理体系的完善和变革作出不懈努力。
We need to strengthen strategic collaboration in international affairs and deepen coordination in the United Nations (UN), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA). We need to jointly uphold multilateralism and the free trade system, oppose unilateralism and bullying tactics, and commit ourselves to improving and updating the global governance system.
亚信成立27年来，顺应时代发展潮流，致力于增进各国互信和协作，维护地区安全稳定，为促进亚洲和平与发展作出积极贡献。在亚信2014年上海峰会上，我提出践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观，倡议探索符合亚洲特点和各国共同利益的安全和发展道路，得到各方积极响应。5年来，我们着力丰富亚信合作理念，充实亚信合作内涵，成立亚信非政府论坛、青年委员会、实业家委员会，加深同联合国、上海合作组织等多边机制合作，显著提升了亚信国际影响力。
In its 27-year history, CICA has responded to the call of the times and sought to enhance trust and collaboration among countries and uphold regional security and stability, making positive contributions to peace and development in Asia. At its 2014 summit in Shanghai, I articulated a new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security and called for a security and development path that suits Asia and serves the common interests of all. My proposal has received a positive response from many parties. Over the last five years, CICA member states have broadened the approach and content of our cooperation, set up a Non-governmental Forum, Youth Council and Business Council under the CICA framework, and enhanced CICA's interaction with other multilateral institutions such as the UN and the SCO, giving a considerable boost to CICA's global standing.
塔吉克斯坦接任亚信主席国以来，为推动亚信发展作出积极贡献。中方愿同塔方及其他成员国一道，以杜尚别峰会为新起点，推动亚信合作不断迈上新台阶，为促进亚洲和世界安全和发展作出更大贡献。
Since assuming chairmanship, Tajikistan has worked hard for CICA's development. The Dushanbe Summit gives all of us -- China, Tajikistan and other member states -- an excellent opportunity to upgrade CICA cooperation and contribute more to the security and development of Asia and beyond.
中国的先哲曰：“事虽小，不为不成”。塔吉克斯坦谚语讲：“有志气的蚂蚁也能把大山搬走”。中方愿同塔方携手努力，以持之以恒的勤勉精神，共铸中塔友好新辉煌。
As an ancient Chinese philosopher observed, "Even for small matters, success will not come without hard work." Likewise, a proverb in Tajikistan goes, "With perseverance, ants will be able to move mountains." My visit will send the message that China is ever ready to work unremittingly with Tajikistan to create a brighter future of our friendship.
23. 习近平在尼泊尔媒体发表署名文章《将跨越喜马拉雅的友谊推向新高度》
将跨越喜马拉雅的友谊推向新高度
Toward Greater Progress of China-Nepal Friendship across the Himalayas
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
应班达里总统邀请，我即将对友好邻邦尼泊尔进行国事访问。这是我第一次访问尼泊尔，但尼泊尔对我来说并不陌生。这里壮美秀丽的山川、独具特色的文化，令我心向往之。我多次会见访华的尼泊尔领导人，同他们结下了深厚友谊。我期待着踏上这片神奇的土地，同尼泊尔朋友畅叙友情，共话合作，规划两国关系发展新蓝图。
I will soon pay a state visit to Nepal, a friendly neighbor of China, at the invitation of President Bidya Devi Bhandari. The visit will be my first, yet the country is no strange place to me. I have long wanted to come to Nepal and see for myself its majestic mountains and rivers and unique culture. I have also met in China visiting Nepali leaders on many occasions and developed with them a deep friendship. I now very much look forward to stepping on this wonderful land to renew friendship and explore cooperation with my Nepali friends. I hope we can together draw up a new blueprint for our bilateral ties.
中尼山水相连，世代友好。1600多年前，中国高僧法显、尼泊尔高僧佛驮跋陀罗互访对方国家，合作翻译了流传至今的佛教经典。中国唐代时，尼泊尔尺尊公主同吐蕃赞普松赞干布联姻，高僧玄奘到访释迦牟尼诞生地兰毗尼并留下珍贵文字记录。元代时，尼泊尔著名工艺家阿尼哥率工匠来华，主持修建了北京妙应寺白塔等宏伟建筑。这些友好佳话，激励着两国人民世世代代相知相亲、携手前行。
China and Nepal are close neighbors linked by the same mountains and rivers and enjoy a long-standing friendship. More than 1,600 years ago, the Chinese and Nepali monks Fa Hien and Buddhabhadra visited each other's country and together translated Buddhist scriptures into Chinese. Their translation works have remained influential to this day. In China's Tang Dynasty (618-907), Nepali Princess Bhrikuti was married to Tibetan King Songtsen Gampo, while the Chinese monk Huen Tsang visited Lumbini, the birthplace of the Buddha, and left many precious written accounts of his pilgrimage. Then in the Yuan Dynasty (1271-1368), Arniko, the renowned Nepali architect, led a group of artisans to China and presided over the construction of the White Stupa at the Miaoying Temple in Beijing among several magnificent structures over the country. These are but a few examples of our past interactions that have inspired a lasting friendship between our peoples.
1955年中尼建立外交关系以来，两国始终相互尊重、相互信任、相互支持，成为邻国间平等相待、友好合作、互利共赢的典范。
Since China and Nepal established diplomatic relations in 1955, our two countries have respected each other and trusted and supported each other, setting an example of equality, friendship, and mutually beneficial cooperation between neighboring countries.
——中尼是互尊互信的好朋友。双方在和平共处五项原则基础上顺利划定了两国边界，使巍峨的喜马拉雅山成为连结两国的牢固纽带。双方在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互坚定支持。尼方坚定奉行一个中国政策，不允许任何势力利用尼泊尔领土从事反华活动。中方坚定支持尼泊尔维护国家主权、独立、领土完整，支持尼方探索符合本国国情的发展道路。
-- China and Nepal are good friends sharing mutual respect and trust. Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, we have successfully demarcated our boundaries, turning the great Himalayas into a real bond between our two countries. We support each other on issues of our respective core interests. Nepal stands firm in upholding the one-China policy and prohibits any force from using its territory for anti-China activities. China firmly supports Nepal in safeguarding national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and in pursuing a development path tailored to its national reality.
——中尼是互惠互利的好伙伴。尼泊尔是中国在南亚地区的重要贸易伙伴和发展合作伙伴，去年双边贸易额达到11亿美元，中国对尼泊尔投资超过3亿美元。尼方积极参加共建“一带一路”，双方正在建设和升级包括公路、口岸、机场、电站等在内的基础设施，一个跨越喜马拉雅的联通网络初现雏形，这不仅便利两国，也将造福地区。
-- China and Nepal are good partners for mutually beneficial cooperation. Nepal is China's important trade and development partner in South Asia, with two-way trade reaching 1.1 billion U.S. dollars and Chinese investments in Nepal exceeding 300 million dollars last year. Nepal has been an active participant in the Belt and Road cooperation, and is working with China on a number of infrastructure projects to build or upgrade highways, ports, airports and power plants. A trans-Himalayan connectivity network is thus taking shape, which will serve not just our two countries but also the region as a whole.
——中尼是互学互鉴的好邻居。中国在兰毗尼建设的中华寺，成为中尼宗教文化交流的标志。尼泊尔是南亚首个中国公民出境旅游目的地国，目前每周有约60个航班往来两国之间，每年人员互访达30多万人次。两国已缔结11对友好城市。日益频繁的交往促进了两国人民相互了解，为两国各自发展进步提供了助力。
-- China and Nepal are good neighbors benefiting from people-to-people exchanges. The Zhong Hua Chinese Buddhist Monastery in Lumbini stands as another symbol of our religious and cultural interactions. Nepal is the first South Asian country to be designated an approved destination for Chinese tourists. Between our two countries, there are about 60 flights every week, and over 300,000 mutual visits every year. Eleven pairs of sister cities have been established between the two sides. These growing exchanges have brought our people ever closer and added impetus to the development of both countries.
——中尼是互帮互助的好兄弟。2008年中国汶川遭受特大地震灾害，尼泊尔政府和人民踊跃捐款捐物，支持中国抗震救灾。2015年尼泊尔大地震发生后，中国政府和人民迅速伸出援手，实施大规模救援行动，并支持尼泊尔灾后重建。这生动展现了中尼守望相助的兄弟之情。
-- China and Nepal are good brothers who always stand alongside each other. When a devastating earthquake hit Wenchuan in 2008, the government and people of Nepal made generous donations in support of the rescue and relief efforts in China. Likewise, in the aftermath of the massive earthquake in Nepal in 2015, the Chinese government and people rushed to the aid of Nepal by conducting big rescue operations and supporting post-disaster reconstruction. These are shining examples of how China and Nepal look out for each other like brothers do.
当前，尼泊尔政府和人民正向着“繁荣尼泊尔、幸福尼泊尔人”的美好愿景砥砺前行，中国政府和人民也在朝着“两个一百年”奋斗目标阔步前进。中尼两国人民梦想相通，命运相连。时代要求两国加强合作，共创美好未来。
While the Nepali government and people are vigorously pursuing their vision of "Prosperous Nepal, Happy Nepali," the Chinese government and people are making big strides toward the "two centenary goals." With the aspirations and future of our people closely linked, it is only natural for China and Nepal to respond to the call of our times and step up cooperation for a better future. Working together, the two countries may do just the following:
——我们要深化战略沟通。双方要从战略高度和长远角度擘画新时期中尼关系蓝图，推动两国关系再攀新高。要保持高层交往，增进政治互信，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上继续坚定相互支持。要加强治国理政和发展经验交流分享，更好造福两国人民。
-- Deepen strategic communication. It is important that we adopt a strategic and long-term perspective and draw up a blueprint for our bilateral relationship to take it to a new height in this new era. We need to maintain high-level exchanges, enhance political mutual trust, and continue to render mutual support on issues concerning each other's core interests. We may also have more exchanges and experience sharing on governance and development to deliver greater benefits to our two peoples.
——我们要拓展务实合作。双方要积极推进跨喜马拉雅立体互联互通网络建设。中方支持中资企业赴尼泊尔投资兴业，重点加强贸易投资、灾后重建、能源、旅游四大领域合作。欢迎尼方出席第二届中国国际进口博览会，促进尼泊尔特色优势产品对华出口。中方将继续大力支持尼泊尔灾后重建，为尼泊尔民生改善提供力所能及的支持和帮助。
-- Broaden practical cooperation. We need to make greater efforts to develop a Multi-dimensional Connectivity Network across the Himalayas. China supports Chinese business investment in Nepal in the four priority cooperation areas of trade and investment, post-disaster reconstruction, energy, and tourism. China welcomes Nepal's participation in the second China International Import Expo to promote exports of its specialty products to China. What's more, China will continue to support post-disaster reconstruction and do what it can to support and assist the betterment of people's lives in Nepal.
——我们要扩大人文交流。双方要促进教育、青年、旅游等领域交流合作，支持两国航空企业开通更多直航，增加人员往来规模。中方支持尼方主办“2020尼泊尔旅游年”活动，鼓励更多中国公民赴尼泊尔旅游观光。中方将为尼泊尔优秀青年提供更多政府奖学金，培养更多尼方建设需要的人才。欢迎更多尼泊尔青年学生来华留学深造。
-- Expand people-to-people exchanges. It is important that we encourage more exchanges and cooperation in such areas as education, youth and tourism, and support our airlines in opening more direct flights to increase mutual visits. China supports Nepal in hosting "Visit Nepal Year 2020," and will encourage more Chinese tourists to visit Nepal. China will give more government scholarships to outstanding young Nepalis and help train more professionals needed in Nepal's development endeavor. China welcomes more Nepali students to China.
——我们要加强安全合作。中方支持尼方加强执法能力建设，将同尼方开展执法培训合作。双方要加强边防联系，更有效打击跨境犯罪，确保两国人员安全和经贸往来顺利开展。还要继续加强两军互访、人员培训、装备技术等领域务实合作。
-- Enhance security cooperation. China supports Nepal in building law-enforcement capacity and will carry out law-enforcement training cooperation with Nepal. We need to scale up border defense contacts to fight transnational crimes more effectively and ensure the safety of our nationals and the smooth flow of trade. We also need to strengthen practical cooperation in mil-to-mil visits, personnel training, and equipment and technologies.
尼泊尔人民常说，“滴水也能装满缸”，中国人也讲“众人拾柴火焰高”。我相信，只要两国继承和发扬友好传统，持之以恒扩大交流合作，就一定能把中尼跨越喜马拉雅的友谊推向新高度。
The Nepalis often say, "Drop by drop is the water pot filled." There is also a Chinese saying: "The flame runs high when everyone adds wood to the fire." I am convinced that as long as our two countries carry forward our tradition of friendship and keep increasing our exchanges and cooperation, we will together take our friendship across the Himalayas to a new height.
21. 习近平在希腊媒体发表署名文章《让古老文明的智慧照鉴未来》
让古老文明的智慧照鉴未来
Let Wisdom of Ancient Civilizations Shine Through the Future中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
很高兴应帕夫洛普洛斯总统邀请，对美丽的希腊进行国事访问。2014年我曾过境罗德岛，希腊古老厚重的文明、勤劳智慧的人民给我留下了深刻印象。我将怀着对文明的尊重和对未来的期许，再次踏上希腊这个美丽的国度，我对此感到由衷的高兴。
It is my great pleasure to pay a state visit to the beautiful country of Greece at the invitation of President Prokopis Pavlopoulos. In 2014, I made a stopover on Rhodes, and was deeply impressed by the ancient and rich Greek civilization and the hard-working and talented Greek people. It is with great respect for civilizations and high expectations for a bright future that I will once again visit this beautiful country, something I very much look forward to.
伟大的古老文明都是相似的。2000多年前，古代中国、古代希腊的文明之光就在亚欧大陆两端交相辉映。古希腊哲学和文学泰斗辈出的黄金时代，恰恰也是中国“百家争鸣”的思想迸发期。曾两次访问中国的希腊文学巨匠卡赞扎基斯有一句名言，“苏格拉底和孔子是人类的两张面具，面具之下是同一张人类理性的面孔”。古希腊“智者学派”萌发的人本主义思想同中国儒家坚持的“以民为本”理念有异曲同工之妙。第欧根尼同中国道家代表人物庄子倡导类似的生活方式和生活理念。
Great civilizations have much in common to offer each other. More than 2,000 years ago, ancient Chinese and Greek civilizations shone brightly in Asia and Europe. Greek's golden era produced many of its great philosophers and literary giants. That coincided with a period in China when "a hundred schools of thought contended with each other" and flourished together. Nikos Kazantzakis, a giant of modern Greek literature who had visited China twice, commented that "Confucius and Socrates were two masks that covered the same face of human logic." Humanism, which traces its origin to the Sophists of ancient Greece, resonates with the Confucian teaching that "people are the roots of a country." One can also find much similarity between the lifestyle and philosophy of Diogenes and Zhuangzi, a leading Daoist philosopher who lived around the 4th century BC in China.
伟大的古老文明都是相知的。公元前4世纪，古希腊人给遥远的中国起了一个美丽的名字“丝之国”。16世纪欧几里德的《几何原本》传入中国，成为中西科学交流的先导。古希腊戏剧家埃斯库罗斯塑造的普罗米修斯形象曾经激发中国革命志士仁人的昂扬斗志。柏拉图的《理想国》、亚里士多德的《政治学》也早就传入了中国。
Great civilizations understand each other better. As early as the 4th century BC, China was known to the Greeks by a beautiful name: Sērikḗ. In the 16th century, Euclid's Elements was introduced into China, paving the way for scientific exchanges between China and the West. The story of Prometheus narrated by Aeschylus was an inspiration to many Chinese revolutionaries. The Republic by Plato and Politics by Aristotle are also among those Greek classics that have long made names for themselves in China.
伟大的古老文明更是相亲的。新中国成立后，是希腊船东率先冲破封锁，为中国送来宝贵物资和设备。当希腊面对经济和债务问题时，中国全心全意帮助希腊朋友渡过难关。2011年2月利比亚战火纷飞时，克里特岛的朋友们克服冬歇期的困难，重开酒店接待自利比亚撤离的数千名中国公民。希腊中国友好协会60年如一日坚持“为两国人民的友好交往工作到老”，中国翻译家罗念生一家三代致力于希腊文学、戏剧的翻译和研究，为增进两国人民友谊作出了重要贡献。
Great civilizations always stand by each other. After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, Greek shipowners were among the first to break through the blockade and send much-needed supplies and equipment to New China. When Greece was plagued by economic and debt woes a decade ago, China provided wholehearted assistance to help our Greek friends emerge from the hard time. When conflict and war raged in Libya in February 2011, hoteliers on Crete, though in winter recess, provided accommodation to thousands of Chinese citizens evacuated from Libya. For over sixty years, year in and year out, the Greece-China Association has been committed to advancing the friendly exchanges between our two nations. The late Prof. Luo Niansheng, a renowned Chinese scholar and translator, is remembered for his life long dedication to the translation and research of Greek literature and for his important contribution to furthering our friendship, a legacy carried on by his son and granddaughter.
1972年中希建交，特别是2006年两国建立全面战略伙伴关系以来，双方坚持互尊互信，从战略高度和长远角度坚定发展双边关系；坚持合作共赢，推动贸易投资、基础设施建设等合作取得丰硕成果，将比雷埃夫斯港打造为地中海第一大港；坚持交流互鉴，向全世界展示了伟大古老文明的和合之美。中希关系发展彰显了文明古国在现代社会互利合作的勃勃生机。
Since we entered into diplomatic ties in 1972 and particularly since we established a comprehensive strategic partnership in 2006, China and Greece have always treated each other with respect and trust, and developed our relationship from a strategic, long-term perspective. We have pursued mutually beneficial cooperation, achieved fruitful outcomes in trade, investment and infrastructure cooperation, and worked together to turn Piraeus into the largest port in the Mediterranean. We have learned from each other through cultural exchanges and shown to the world the harmony of two great and celebrated civilizations. The growth of China-Greece relations is testimony that ancient civilizations are capable of dynamic, mutually beneficial cooperation in modern times.
中国和希腊都曾经历艰难困苦，但两国人民始终保持着自强不息的奋斗精神。当前，两国都处在国家发展新的历史时期，双边关系面临新的历史机遇。我愿通过这次访问，同希腊领导人一道，共同描绘中希关系发展的新蓝图。
China and Greece have both been through trials and tribulations in history. This nurtures in our people a great resilience and a determination to strive forward. Today, China and Greece have both reached a new stage of development, which presents a golden opportunity for expanding our ties. During my visit, I hope to work with your leaders to map out a brighter future for our relations.
我们要全面提升中希关系战略水平，保持密切交往势头，不断增进相互了解和信任，继续支持彼此核心利益和重大关切，做全面合作的战略伙伴。
We need to raise the strategic level of China-Greece relations in all respects, maintain the strong momentum of engagement, continually enhance mutual understanding and trust, and render further support for each other's core interests and major concerns. This will make us strategic partners engaged in all-round cooperation.
我们要扎实提升各领域务实合作水平，以比雷埃夫斯港口项目为龙头，不断拓宽合作领域、扩大投资规模。中方愿进口更多希腊优质农产品，丰富中国消费者的选择，也希望希腊市场对中国企业和产品继续敞开大门，做互利共赢的伙伴。
We need to improve all areas of our practical cooperation with concrete efforts, broaden cooperation areas and upscale our investment ties with the Port of Piraeus as a flagship project. China is ready to import more quality agricultural products from Greece to provide our consumers with more choices. We hope Greece will open its market wider to Chinese companies and products. This will make our partnership one of mutual benefit.
我们要加紧提升共建“一带一路”合作水平，充分利用希腊区位和海运能力优势，把握希腊加入中国－中东欧国家合作机制的机遇，积极推进中欧陆海快线等务实合作，助力中欧互联互通平台发展，做中欧合作的典范。
We need to step up Belt and Road cooperation with down-to-earth efforts, make the most of the location and shipping capacity of Greece, seize the opportunities brought by Greece's joining the China-CEEC cooperation, actively advance practical projects under the China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line, and contribute to the China-EU Connectivity Platform. This will make us front-runners in China-Europe cooperation.
我们要促进文化交流合作，办好雅典孔子学院和雅典中国文化中心，持续扩大两国人员交往，从两国悠久的文明中汲取源源不断的滋养，做文明对话的表率。
We need to strengthen our cultural exchanges and cooperation, ensure the continued success of the Confucius Institute and China Cultural Center in Athens, and expand people-to-people exchanges to draw further strength from our time-honored civilizations. This will make us a model of dialogue between civilizations.
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。70年来，特别是改革开放40多年来，亿万中国人民不懈奋斗，取得了举世瞩目的发展成就。同时，中国也以自身的和平发展积极回应着世界如何发展的时代命题。当前，国际形势正在发生深刻复杂变化，不稳定性不确定性增多。中希应该挖掘古老文明的深邃智慧，展现文明古国的历史担当，共同推动构建相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系，共同推动构建人类命运共同体。
This year we celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. For 70 years, particularly since the start of reform and opening-up over four decades ago, the over one billion Chinese people have worked hard and made phenomenal progress. Through its own peaceful development, China is trying to answer the great question of our time: What should the future of our world look like? The international landscape is undergoing profound and complex transformation amid growing uncertainty and instability. China and Greece, each with a strong sense of history and responsibility, can tap our civilizations for wisdom and build a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, equity, justice and mutually beneficial cooperation. Together, we can usher in a community with a shared future for all mankind.
18. 习近平在缅甸媒体发表署名文章《续写千年胞波情谊的崭新篇章》
续写千年胞波情谊的崭新篇章
Writing a New Chapter in Our Millennia-Old Pauk-Phaw Friendship中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
很高兴应温敏总统邀请，在中缅建交70周年之际对缅甸进行国事访问。2009年我到访过这片美丽的土地。缅甸优美宁静的风光、绚丽多彩的文化、勤劳淳朴的人民给我留下了深刻印象。我期待通过这次访问，同缅甸朋友共叙“胞波”情谊，共话合作大计。
As we mark the 70th anniversary of China-Myanmar diplomatic relations, it gives me great pleasure to pay a state visit to Myanmar at the invitation of President U Win Myint. I visited this beautiful land in 2009, and was deeply impressed by its serene landscape, diverse cultures and hardworking people. With the upcoming visit, I look forward to renewing China's "pauk-phaw" ties with Myanmar and discussing our future cooperation.
中缅山水相连，世代比邻而居。在缅语中，“胞波”意为一母同胞的兄弟。两国人民自古相亲相融，“胞波”情谊源远流长。早在公元前4世纪，我们的祖先就打通了贯穿川滇缅印的“金银大道”往来通商。中国盛唐时期，缅甸骠国王子率领舞乐队不远千里访问长安，著名诗人白居易挥毫写下千古绝唱《骠国乐》。缅甸在不同社会制度国家中第一个承认新中国。两国老一辈领导人身体力行，为中缅关系发展倾注了大量心血。周恩来总理9次访问缅甸，他身穿缅甸民族服装同缅甸民众一道庆祝泼水节的情景，至今传为佳话。
China and Myanmar are close neighbors connected by shared mountains and rivers. Our people have lived alongside each other for thousands of years. In Myanmar language, pauk-phaw means siblings from the same mother. It is an apt description of the fraternal sentiments between our two peoples, whose close ties date back to ancient times. As early as the 4th century B.C., our ancestors began to trade with each other through the "Gold and Silver Road" linking China's Sichuan and Yunnan provinces with Myanmar and India. In the heyday of China's Tang Dynasty in the early 9th century, the Prince of Pyu led a troupe of dancers and musicians on a visit to Chang'an (the capital of Tang Dynasty known today as Xi'an). Their enchanting performance was celebrated by Bai Juyi, the foremost Chinese poet of his time, in an ode to music from the kingdom of Pyu. Soon after the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, Myanmar was the first of countries with a different social system to recognize New China. The elder statesmen of our two countries have since made enormous efforts to develop China-Myanmar relations. Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai, who visited Myanmar nine times, is still fondly remembered for celebrating Thingyan Festival together with the people of Myanmar while dressed in traditional local attire.
建交70年来，中缅倡导并践行和平共处五项原则，始终相互信任，相互尊重，相互支持，树立了大小国家平等相待、互利共赢、共同发展的典范，给两国人民带来了实实在在的利益。
Throughout the 70 years of our diplomatic ties, China and Myanmar have together championed and put into practice the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Our relationship has been marked by mutual trust, mutual respect and mutual support. It has become a prime example of equality, win-win cooperation and common development between countries of different sizes. Our close ties have delivered real benefits to people in both countries.
——两国政治互信根基更加牢固。上世纪60年代，中缅本着平等协商、互谅互让精神率先解决边界问题。当前，两国高层交往频繁，全面战略合作伙伴关系持续稳定发展。中国坚定支持缅甸走符合自身国情的发展道路，支持缅甸政府为推动国内和平与民族和解所作努力，支持缅甸在国际舞台维护正当权益和国家尊严。缅甸在涉及中国核心利益和重大关切问题上给予中方坚定支持。
-- We have further cemented political mutual trust. In the 1960s, Myanmar became the first among China's neighbors to settle the boundary issue with China in the spirit of equal consultation, mutual understanding and mutual accommodation. Today, our two countries enjoy close high-level exchanges, and our comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership is growing steadily. China firmly supports Myanmar in pursuing a development path suited to its national conditions. China supports the efforts of the Myanmar government to promote peace and reconciliation, and supports Myanmar in safeguarding its legitimate rights and interests and national dignity in the international arena. Myanmar, for its part, has given China staunch support on issues involving China's core interests and major concerns.
——两国务实合作越做越大。中缅两国经济互补性强，潜力巨大。中国长期保持缅甸第一大贸易伙伴和最重要投资来源国地位，2019年前11个月，双边贸易额达168亿美元，越来越多缅甸农畜产品走进中国千家万户。基础设施建设等各领域合作成果丰硕。缅甸是共建“一带一路”沿线重要国家，双方深化发展战略对接，签署共建中缅经济走廊合作相关文件并成立联合工作委员会，走廊建设稳步推进。
-- We have further expanded our practical cooperation. The economies of China and Myanmar are highly complementary, promising great room for cooperation. China has long been Myanmar's largest trading partner and most important source of investment. Our bilateral trade reached 16.8 billion U.S. dollars in the first 11 months of 2019. More and more agricultural and livestock products from Myanmar are making their way to Chinese kitchens. Fruitful cooperation is taking place in infrastructure construction and many other fields. With Myanmar as an important partner country of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), our two sides have capitalized on the convergence of our development strategies. We have signed cooperation documents on building the China-Myanmar Economic Corridor (CMEC) and established a joint CMEC committee to oversee steady progress.
——两国人文交流纽带日益拉紧。中缅文化、宗教、人员交流活跃，为深化“胞波”情谊提供了坚实支撑。中国国宝级文物佛牙舍利4次应邀赴缅甸供奉，缅甸在洛阳白马寺捐建了缅式风格佛殿。中国在缅甸启动“光明行”、先心病儿童救助行动，为众多患者带去福音。中国优秀影视作品在缅甸引发热烈反响。
-- We have further strengthened people-to-people bonds. Our vibrant cultural, religious and personnel exchanges provide solid support for deepening our pauk-phaw friendship. China's national treasure, the Buddha tooth relic, was displayed four times in Myanmar for public obeisance. With donations from Myanmar, a Myanmese-style shrine has been built at the White Horse Temple in Luoyang, Henan province of China. With the help of Chinese doctors and nurses, many cataract patients in Myanmar have had their sight restored and children with congenital heart disease have received proper medical care. Popular Chinese films and TV programs have found a wide audience in Myanmar.
今年，中国将全面建成小康社会，实现第一个百年奋斗目标。缅甸经济社会发展不断取得新成就。双方应该以建交70周年为契机，弘扬传统友谊，深化互利合作，推动中缅关系迈入新时代。
This year, China will achieve its First Centenary Goal of ushering in a moderately prosperous society in all respects. Myanmar is making continuous progress in economic and social development. As we mark the 70th anniversary of our diplomatic relations, it is important that we carry forward our traditional friendship and deepen mutually beneficial cooperation, so that we will bring China-Myanmar relations into a new era.
——加强战略沟通，擘画双边关系新蓝图。双方要继续发扬高层交往引领作用，加强各层级沟通协调，推进发展经验分享，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上继续坚定相互支持，从战略高度和长远角度深化全面战略合作伙伴关系，让命运共同体意识在两国人民心中落地生根。中方支持缅方通过政治对话推进国内和平和解进程，双方要共同维护边境和平稳定。
-- We need to draw a new blueprint for bilateral ties by strengthening strategic communication. Our two sides may continue to harness the vital role of high-level exchanges in guiding our relations, step up communication and coordination at all levels and share development experience. It is important that we continue to show strong mutual support on issues concerning each other's core interests. By deepening our comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership with a strategic and long-term perspective, we will make the idea of building a community with a shared future take root in the hearts and minds of our people. China supports Myanmar in advancing the peace and reconciliation process through political dialogue. The two sides may work together to ensure peace and stability along our border.
——深化经贸往来，注入互利合作新动能。双方要深化共建“一带一路”框架内务实合作，推动中缅经济走廊框架从概念转入实质规划建设阶段，着力推进皎漂经济特区、中缅边境经济合作区、仰光新城三端支撑，深化互联互通、电力能源、交通运输、农业、金融、民生等领域务实合作，让中缅互利合作释放更多惠民红利。
-- We need to bring new impetus to our mutually beneficial cooperation by deepening trade and economic exchanges. Our two sides need to deepen results-oriented Belt and Road cooperation and move from a conceptual stage to concrete planning and implementation in building the CMEC. Efforts need to be made to promote the three pillars of the CMEC, namely the Kyaukpyu Special Economic Zone, the China-Myanmar Border Economic Cooperation Zone and the New Yangon City. We also need to deepen practical and mutually beneficial cooperation in such areas as connectivity, electricity, energy, transportation, agriculture, finance and livelihood to deliver more benefits to both peoples.
——加大交流互鉴，增添“胞波”情谊新内涵。双方将今年确定为“中缅文化旅游年”，相信缅甸美丽的自然景观和丰富的文化古迹会吸引越来越多中国游客。双方将围绕建交70周年举办一系列庆祝活动，扩大教育、宗教、媒体、影视等领域交流合作，不断夯实中缅友好民意支撑，使“胞波”情谊更加深入人心，焕发新的生机和活力。
-- We need to add new substance to our pauk-phaw friendship by scaling up exchanges and mutual learning. Our two sides have designated 2020 as the China-Myanmar Year of Culture and Tourism. Myanmar's charming natural scenery and fascinating cultural heritage will surely attract more and more Chinese tourists. To celebrate the 70th anniversary of our diplomatic ties, the two sides will host a string of events to expand exchanges and cooperation on education, religion, media, movies and TV programs. Such joint events will help strengthen public support for China-Myanmar friendship, thus cementing and re-energizing our pauk-phaw friendship.
——增进协调配合，开创地区和平稳定新局面。当前，单边主义、保护主义抬头，双方要加强在联合国、东亚合作、澜沧江－湄公河合作等多边机制框架内的协调配合。在新时代弘扬和平共处五项原则精神，推动建设相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系，努力构建人类命运共同体。
-- We need to make new progress in regional peace and stability by enhancing coordination and cooperation. Confronted by rising unilateralism and protectionism, our two countries need to strengthen coordination and collaboration in the multilateral fora, such as in the United Nations and within the framework of East Asia cooperation and Lancang-Mekong cooperation. In this new era, we need to champion the spirit of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, encourage efforts to foster a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation, and strive to build a community with a shared future for mankind.
中缅两国有句共同的谚语，“亲戚越走越亲，朋友越走越近”。站在建交70年的历史新起点上，我们愿同缅甸朋友携手努力，推动构建更为紧密的中缅命运共同体，续写千年“胞波”情谊的新乐章。
In China and Myanmar, people have similar sayings to the effect that more exchanges will bring families and friends closer together. In this 70th anniversary year, China-Myanmar relations stand at a new starting point. Let us work hand in hand to build an even closer China-Myanmar community with a shared future and write a new chapter for our millennia-old pauk-phaw friendship.
