102. 习近平在二十国集团领导人峰会工作午宴上的发言
在二十国集团领导人峰会工作午宴上关于中国主办2016年峰会的发言
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年11月16日，安塔利亚）
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
On the 2016 G20 Summit in China
At the Working Lunch of the G20 Summit
Antalya, 16 November 2015
各位同事：	Colleagues,
首先，我要祝贺埃尔多安总统，这次安塔利亚峰会取得圆满成功，对外释放了二十国集团为世界经济谋动力、为各国人民谋福祉的积极信号。	
Let me begin by congratulating President Erdogan on the full success of the Antalya Summit. It has sent an encouraging signal of the G20 working together to boost the global economy and improve people's well-being all over the world.
中国将于明年9月4日至5日在浙江省杭州市举行二十国集团领导人第十一次峰会。借此机会，我要感谢各国和国际组织对中方的支持。期待各位同事届时出席杭州峰会。	
China will host the 11th G20 Summit from September 4th to 5th next year in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province. I wish to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to countries and international organizations for their support. I look forward to welcoming you to the Hangzhou Summit.
中国有句俗语，上有天堂，下有苏杭。意思是说，杭州和苏州风景如画，堪称人间天堂。杭州是历史文化名城，也是创新活力之城，相信2016年峰会将给大家呈现一种历史和现实交汇的独特韵味。	
There is a Chinese saying, "Up in heaven, there is paradise; down on earth, there are Suzhou and Hangzhou." It means that the cities of Hangzhou and Suzhou have beautiful sceneries that make them comparable to paradise on earth. Hangzhou is not only a renowned city of history and culture, but also a leader in innovation. I trust that the 2016 Summit will present to us a unique setting where history meets modernity.
在前期同各方沟通中，中方深深感受到大家对明年峰会的期待。基于当前形势和各方期待，中方把2016年峰会的主题确定为“构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济”，希望从4个重点领域推进明年峰会筹备工作。一是创新增长方式，重在推进改革创新，开辟和抓住新机遇，提升世界经济增长潜力。二是完善全球经济金融治理，增强新兴市场国家和发展中国家的代表性和发言权，提高世界经济抗风险能力。三是促进国际贸易和投资，发挥其对增长的推动作用，构建开放型世界经济。四是推动包容、联动式发展，力求落实2030年可持续发展议程，消除贫困，实现共同发展。	
Through our previous conversations with various G20 members, we have got a keen sense of people's expectations for next year's Summit. Based on an assessment of the current situation and the expectations of all parties, we have formulated the theme of the 2016 Summit as "Towards an Innovative, Invigorated, Interconnected and Inclusive World Economy". We hope to take forward the preparatory work for the Summit in the following four key areas. First, we need to transform growth patterns in innovative ways with particular focus on pursuing reform and innovation. We must create and seize new opportunities to raise the potential of global economic growth. Second, we need to improve global economic and financial governance, increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries, and enhance the capacity of the global economy to ward off risks. Third, we need to promote global trade and investment to generate growth and build an open world economy. Fourth, we need to promote inclusive and interconnected development, strive to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, eliminate poverty, and achieve common development.
我们提出上述主题和重点，主要出于3方面考虑。	
Our proposal on the above theme and key areas is based on the following three observations.
（一）世界经济基本走出危机，但复苏高度脆弱，增长动力不足，主要经济体走势和政策更趋分化。我们迫切需要找到新的增长源，推动世界经济走向新一轮繁荣。	
First, although the global economy is no longer mired in crisis, the recovery remains weak and fragile for lack of growth engines. And the performances and policies of major economies continue to diverge. We are in an urgent need of new sources of growth to take the global economy to a new round of prosperity.
（二）近年来，全球经济治理改革进展不畅，国际经济贸易规则加速演变。今年联合国发展峰会、世界贸易组织第十届部长会、气候变化巴黎大会相继举行，对国际发展合作、多边贸易体制、应对气候变化全球行动作出新的规划。我们需要采取协调一致行动，引领国际经济合作发展方向。	
Second, reform of the global economic governance in recent years has hit a rough patch and international economic and trade rules have been fast evolving. The UN Sustainable Development Summit, the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference and the Paris Climate Conference are all on this year's global agenda, where new plans are being made for international development cooperation, the multilateral trading regime and the global campaign against climate change. We need to make coordinated and concerted efforts to guide international economic cooperation.
（三）二十国集团面临从危机应对向长效治理机制的转变，议题从短期问题向深层次和长期性问题延伸。二十国集团成员协调宏观经济政策和加强合作的必要性和难度同步增加。我们需要发扬伙伴关系精神，促使二十国集团顺利完成转变，巩固作为全球经济治理主要平台的地位。	
Third, G20 is now facing a transformation from a mechanism of crisis response to one of long-term governance. As its agenda items shift from short-term issues to deep-seated and longer-term ones, the necessity for and difficulty of macroeconomic policy coordination and enhanced cooperation among G20 members have both increased. We need to act in the spirit of partnership to work for the smooth transformation of G20 and the consolidation of its role as the premier forum for global economic governance.
各位同事！	
Colleagues,
二十国集团是每个成员的二十国集团。在杭州峰会筹备过程中，中方将始终保持开放、透明、包容姿态，同各成员加强沟通和协调，共同把二十国集团维护好、建设好、发展好。
G20 belongs to each and every one of its members. In preparing for the Hangzhou Summit, China will consistently follow an open, transparent and inclusive approach, and strengthen communication and coordination with all other members to jointly uphold, strengthen and develop G20.
明年9月，我将在西湖之畔欢迎各位。	
I look forward to seeing you at the shore of the West Lake in Hangzhou next September.
谢谢大家！	
Thank you.
136. 习近平发表2014年新年贺词
新年前夕，国家主席习近平通过中国国际广播电台、中央人民广播电台、中央电视台，发表了二〇一四年新年贺词。全文如下：	
Chinese President Xi Jinping has delivered a New Year address to domestic and overseas audience via China Radio International, China National Radio and China Central Television. Here's the entire speech.
我们即将迎来充满希望的2014年。一元复始，万象更新。在这里，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞和澳门特别行政区同胞，向台湾同胞和海外侨胞，向世界各国和各地区的朋友们，致以新年的祝福！祝福老人们健康！祝福孩子们快乐！祝福每个家庭幸福安康！	
We'll soon usher in the year 2014 with great hopes. As the new year begins, let us also start anew. I'm delighted to extend New Year wishes to Chinese people of all ethnic groups, to compatriots in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the Macao Special Administrative Region and Taiwan, to overseas Chinese and to friends all over the world! I wish senior people and children, and every family happiness, peace and health in the New Year.
在这辞旧迎新之际，无数工人、农民、知识分子、干部仍然坚守在工作岗位，不少同胞依然奔波在世界各地为祖国辛勤工作，许多人民解放军和武警官兵、公安干警正在履行光荣使命。他们有的远离祖国、远离亲人，有的不能同家人团聚。我代表祖国和人民，向他们致以诚挚的问候，祝他们平安顺利！	
At a time to ring out the old year and ring in the new, countless workers, farmers, intellectuals and officials still remain at their posts working hard. Many of our compatriots are on the go, working in various regions of the world for the motherland. Many members of the People's Liberation Army, armed police and public security are performing their glorious duties. Some of them are far away from the motherland, and their close relatives and some cannot have a reunion with family members. On behalf of the motherland and people, I'd like to offer my sincere greetings to them and wish them a peaceful and smooth new year.
2013年，对我们国家和人民来说是很不平凡的一年。我们共同战胜了各种困难和挑战，取得了新的显著成就。成绩来之不易，凝聚了大家的心血和汗水。我向大家表示衷心的感谢！	
The year 2013 has been an extraordinary year for our nation and people. We have worked together in overcoming a variety of obstacles and challenges, and made new outstanding achievements. The achievements have not come easily as they are the result of blood and sweat from all. I'd like to convey my heartfelt gratitude to you all.
2013年，我们对全面深化改革作出总体部署，共同描绘了未来发展的宏伟蓝图。2014年，我们将在改革的道路上迈出新的步伐。	
In 2013, we made an overall plan on comprehensively deepening reform and laid out a grand blueprint together for future development. In 2014, we are expected to make new strides on the road of reform.
我们推进改革的根本目的，是要让国家变得更加富强、让社会变得更加公平正义、让人民生活得更加美好。改革是需要我们共同为之奋斗的伟大事业，需要付出艰辛的努力。一分耕耘，一分收获。在改革开放的伟大实践中，我们已经创造了无数辉煌。我坚信，中国人民必将创造出新的辉煌。	
We have advanced reforms with the fundamental purpose of making our nation stronger and more prosperous. We also aim to achieve a higher degree of impartiality and justice in society so that people can live a better life. Reform is a great cause that calls for common commitments and strenuous efforts from us all. We must sow before we can reap. In the great practice of reform and opening up, we have already made countless spectacular achievements. I firmly believe that the Chinese people will create new spectacles.
宇宙浩瀚，星汉灿烂。70多亿人共同生活在我们这个星球上，应该守望相助、同舟共济、共同发展。中国人民追寻实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦，也祝愿各国人民能够实现自己的梦想。我真诚希望，世界各国人民在实现各自梦想的过程中相互理解、相互帮助，努力把我们赖以生存的地球建设成为共同的美好家园。	
There exists an immense and vast universe with bright stars. More than 7 billion people inhabit the planet Earth. We in the same boat should keep watch and help each other to achieve common development. We Chinese people seek to realize the Chinese dream, a great revitalization of the Chinese nation, and also wish that the dreams of people of all countries will come true. I sincerely hope that people of various countries in the world will understand and help each other in the course of realizing their dreams and build the Earth that we rely on for survival into a common beautiful homeland.
生活总是充满希望的，成功总是属于积极进取、不懈追求的人们。我们在前进的道路上，还会遇到各种风险和挑战。让老百姓过上更加幸福的生活，还有大量工作要做。我们要谦虚谨慎、艰苦奋斗，共同谱写伟大祖国发展的时代新篇章。
Life is always full of hopes. Success always belongs to those who keep forging ahead unswervingly. On our way forward, we will encounter various risks and challenges. We still need to complete a lot of tasks so that common people can live a happier life. We need to be modest and prudent and work hard together in writing a new chapter for the development of our great nation.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you all.
121. 国家主席习近平二〇一五年新年贺词
时间过得真快，2014年就要过去了，2015年正在向我们走来。在这辞旧迎新的时刻，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞和澳门特别行政区同胞，向台湾同胞和海外侨胞，向世界各国和各地区的朋友们，致以新年的祝福！	
Time flies. 2014 is coming to an end and 2015 is approaching. At this turn of the year, I wish to extend my best wishes to people of all ethnic groups in China, to our compatriots in the Hong Kong and Macau Special Administrative Regions, to our compatriots in Taiwan and overseas Chinese, as well as to friends in other countries and regions in the world.
2014年是令人难忘的。这一年，我们锐意推进改革，啃下了不少硬骨头，出台了一系列重大改革举措，许多改革举措同老百姓的利益密切相关。我们适应经济发展新常态，积极推动经济社会发展，人民生活有了新的改善。12月12日，南水北调中线一期工程正式通水，沿线40多万人移民搬迁，为这个工程作出了无私奉献，我们要向他们表示敬意，希望他们在新的家园生活幸福。这一年，我们着力正风肃纪，重点反对形式主义、官僚主义、享乐主义和奢靡之风，情况有了很大改观。我们加大反腐败斗争力度，以零容忍的态度严惩腐败分子，显示了反腐惩恶的坚定决心。这一年，我们加强同世界各国的合作交往，主办了北京亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，我国领导人多次出访，外国领导人也大量来访，这些活动让世界更好认识了中国。	
2014 is unforgettable. During the past year, we have pushed forward reform with strong determination, cracked many hard nuts, and introduced a string of major reform measures, many of which are closely related to the interests of the general public. We have adapted to the new normal of economic growth, actively promoted economic and social development, and brought about further improvement in people's lives. On 12 December, the first phase of the central route of the South-North Water Diversion Project went into operation. More than 400,000 people along the route have been relocated. We pay tribute to them for their selfless contribution, and wish them a happy life in their new homes. In the past year, we have endeavored to improve our work style and strengthen party and government discipline, with efforts focusing on fighting against formalism, bureaucracy, hedonism and extravagance. The situation has greatly improved. We have stepped up the fight against corruption and punished corrupt officials with a zero-tolerance attitude, which demonstrates our commitment to fighting against corruption and other evil forces. In the past year, we have enhanced our cooperation and exchanges with countries around the world. We hosted the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in Beijing. Our leaders have visited many countries and received many foreign leaders. These exchanges of visits have helped the world understand China better.
为了做好这些工作，我们的各级干部也是蛮拼的。当然，没有人民支持，这些工作是难以做好的，我要为我们伟大的人民点赞。	
Officials at various levels have spared no efforts to perform their duty. Of course, those achievements would not have been possible without the support of the people. I would like to give a "thumbs up" to our great people.
这一年，我们通过立法确定了中国人民抗日战争胜利纪念日、烈士纪念日、南京大屠杀死难者国家公祭日，举行了隆重活动。对一切为国家、为民族、为和平付出宝贵生命的人们，不管时代怎样变化，我们都要永远铭记他们的牺牲和奉献。	
During the past year, we have established the Victory Day of the Chinese People's War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression, the Martyrs' Day and the National Memorial Day for Victims of the Nanjing Massacre through legislation. These new memorial days included many solemn events. Despite the change of times, we would always remember the sacrifice and contribution of those who gave their lives for the Chinese nation and for peace.
这一年，我们也经历了一些令人悲伤的时刻。马航MH370航班失踪，150多名同胞下落不明，我们没有忘记他们，我们一定要持续努力、想方设法找到他们。这一年，我国发生了一些重大自然灾害和安全事故，不少同胞不幸离开了我们，云南鲁甸地震就造成了600多人遇难，我们怀念他们，祝愿他们的亲人们都安好。	
During the past year, we have also experienced some sad moments. Malaysia Airlines MH370 went missing. The whereabouts of more than 150 of our fellow countrymen remain unknown. We have not forgotten them. We will continue to make all possible efforts to find them. During the past year, our country has also suffered from a number of major natural disasters and work safety accidents, in which some compatriots lost their lives. The Ludian earthquake in Yunnan Province claimed more than 600 lives. Our hearts are with them and we wish their families well.
新年的钟声即将敲响。我们要继续努力，把人民的期待变成我们的行动，把人民的希望变成生活的现实。我们要继续全面深化改革，开弓没有回头箭，改革关头勇者胜。我们要全面推进依法治国，用法治保障人民权益、维护社会公平正义、促进国家发展。我们要让全面深化改革、全面推进依法治国如鸟之两翼、车之双轮，推动全面建成小康社会的目标如期实现。	
The New Year bell is about to ring. We will continue our efforts to act upon people's expectations and turn their aspirations into reality. We will continue to deepen reform in an all-round way. An arrow that has been released makes no turning back. At this critical moment of our reform process, only those who brave hardships would prevail. We must advance the rule of law in an all-round way, and use the rule of law to guarantee people's rights and interests, uphold social equity and justice, and promote national development. For the goal of building a moderately prosperous society in an all-round way to be completed in due course, comprehensively deepening reform and strengthening the rule of law must go forward hand in hand, like the two wings of a bird or the two wheels of a car.
我国人民生活总体越来越好，但我们时刻都要想着那些生活中还有难处的群众。我们要满腔热情做好民生工作，特别是要做好扶贫开发和基本生活保障工作，让农村贫困人口、城市困难群众等所有需要帮助的人们都能生活得到保障、心灵充满温暖。	
The living standards of the Chinese people are constantly improving, but we should always keep in mind those who are still living in hardships. We will work with passion to improve their well-being, with efforts focusing on poverty alleviation and guaranteeing basic living conditions. We will provide assistance to all those in need of help, including poverty-stricken farmers and urban residents with difficulties, so that their basic living conditions are guaranteed and their hearts are filled with warmth.
我们要继续全面推进从严治党，毫不动摇转变作风，高举反腐的利剑，扎牢制度的笼子，在中国共产党领导的社会主义国家里，腐败分子发现一个就要查处一个，有腐必惩，有贪必肃。	
We will continue to comprehensively strengthen party discipline, and unswervingly improve our work style. We will always resort to anti-corruption as a sharp weapon, and consolidate mechanism-building as a cage to contain powers. In this socialist country led by the Communist Party of China, any corrupt official who is exposed must be dealt with. All those involved in corruption and embezzlement must be prosecuted and punished.
我们正在从事的事业是伟大的，坚忍不拔才能胜利，半途而废必将一事无成。我们的蓝图是宏伟的，我们的奋斗必将是艰巨的。全党全国各族人民要团结一心，集思广益用好机遇，众志成城应对挑战，立行立改破解难题，奋发有为进行创新，让国家发展和人民生活一年比一年好。	
We are now pursuing a lofty mission. Only perseverance will lead to victory, while giving up halfway will lead us nowhere. Our blueprint is ambitious, but our task is arduous. All party members and people of all ethnic groups in the country must stand united. We must pool our wisdom to seize opportunities, work together to embrace challenges, tackle problems with quick action, and carry on innovation with determination, in order to make China a better country year by year and constantly improve people's living standards.
中国人民关注自己国家的前途，也关注世界的前途。非洲发生了埃博拉疫情，我们给予帮助；马尔代夫首都遭遇断水，我们给予支援，许许多多这样的行动展示了中国人民同各国人民同呼吸、共命运的情怀。当前世界仍很不安宁。我们呼唤和平，我真诚希望，世界各国人民共同努力，让所有的人民免于饥寒的煎熬，让所有的家庭免于战火的威胁，让所有的孩子都能在和平的阳光下茁壮成长。	
The Chinese people care greatly about the country's future and the future of the world. When Ebola emerged in Africa, we offered our help. When a water shortage occurred in the capital of the Maldives, we provided assistance. There are numerous examples like these which demonstrate the spirit of common destiny of the Chinese people and all humanity. The world is not yet a tranquil place. We long for peace and we sincerely hope that people of all countries can work together to ensure that all humanity will be free from the suffering of hunger and all families free from the threat of wars, and that all children can grow up in the sunshine of peace.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!
94. 习近平主席2016年新年贺词
再过几个小时，新年的钟声就要敲响了。我们即将告别2015年，迎来2016年的第一缕阳光。在这辞旧迎新的时刻，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞和澳门特别行政区同胞，向台湾同胞和海外侨胞，向世界各国和各地区的朋友们，致以新年的祝福！
In a few hours, the New Year bell will be ringing. We will say goodbye to the year 2015 and welcome the first ray of sunshine of the year 2016. At this turn of the year, I wish to extend my New Year greetings to the people of all ethnic groups in China, to our compatriots in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and the Macao Special Administrative Region, to our compatriots in Taiwan and overseas Chinese, as well as friends in other countries and regions in the world.
有付出，就会有收获。2015年，中国人民付出了很多，也收获了很多。我国经济增长继续居于世界前列，改革全面发力，司法体制改革继续深化，“三严三实”专题教育推动了政治生态改善，反腐败斗争深入进行。经过全国各族人民共同努力，“十二五”规划圆满收官，广大人民群众有了更多获得感。
As long as we pay, there will be gains. In 2015, the great efforts of the Chinese people have paid off. China's economic growth continues to lead in the world. Reform has been pushed forward comprehensively. Reform in the judicial system has been further deepened. The special educational campaign of "Three Stricts and Three Earnests" has promoted the improvement of the political eco-system. The fight against corruption has been carried out deeply. Through the joint efforts of the people of all ethnic groups across the country, we see a successful conclusion of the "12thFive-Year Plan". The general public has enjoyed the increasing "sense of gain".
这一年，我们隆重纪念了中国人民抗日战争暨世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年，举行了盛大阅兵，昭示了正义必胜、和平必胜、人民必胜的真理。我们全面实施改革强军战略，宣布裁军30万。我和马英九先生在新加坡会面，实现了跨越66年时空的握手，表明两岸关系和平发展是两岸同胞的共同心愿。
During this past year, we solemnly commemorated the 70thanniversary of the Victory of the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and the World Anti-Fascist War. We held a grand military parade, making the truth clear to all that justice will prevail, peace will prevail, and the people will prevail. We will comprehensively implement the reform strategy to strengthen China's military, and we announced China will cut the number of its troops by 300, 000. Mr. Ma Ying-jeou and I met in Singapore, with a handshake that transcended 66 years of time and space. This shows the peaceful development of cross-Strait relations is the common wish of the people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait.
这一年，北京获得第24届冬奥会举办权，人民币纳入国际货币基金组织特别提款权货币篮子，我国自主研制的C919大型客机总装下线，中国超级计算机破世界纪录蝉联“六连冠”，我国科学家研制的暗物质探测卫星发射升空，屠呦呦成为我国首位获得诺贝尔奖的科学家……这说明，只要坚持，梦想总是可以实现的。
During the past year, Beijing won the bid to host the 24thWinter Olympic Games. The renminbi has been included into the Special Drawing Rights basket of the International Monetary Fund. China's domestically-produced C919 large passenger aircraft rolled off the production line. China's super computer broke the world record for a sixth consecutive year. A satellite developed by Chinese scientists detect "dark matter" was launched. Tu Youyou became China's first scientist to win a Nobel Prize. These show that as long as we persevere, dreams can always be realized.
这一年，我们有欣喜，也有悲伤。“东方之星”号客轮翻沉、天津港特别重大火灾爆炸、深圳滑坡等事故造成不少同胞失去了生命，还有我们的同胞被恐怖分子残忍杀害，令人深感痛心。我们怀念他们，愿逝者安息、生者安康！群众的生活中还有一些困难和烦恼。党和政府一定会继续努力，切实保障人民生命财产安全、保障人民生活改善、保障人民身体健康。
During the past year, we had happiness, as well as sadness. The capsizing of the "Eastern Star" ferry, the major fire and explosions at Tianjin Port, the Shenzhen landslide and other accidents have taken the lives of many of our countrymen. And some countrymen were brutally killed by terrorists. All these are deeply heartbreaking. We will remember them. We wish all the deceased to rest in peace and the living safe and healthy. Some difficulties and troubles still remain in people's daily life. The Communist Party of China and the government will surely continue efforts to effectively guarantee the safety of people's lives and property, guarantee the improvement f people's livelihood, and guarantee people's health.
同志们，朋友们，女士们，先生们，
Comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen,
2016年是我国进入全面建成小康社会决胜阶段的开局之年。中共十八届五中全会明确了未来5年我国发展的方向。前景令人鼓舞、催人奋进，但幸福不会从天降。我们要树立必胜信念、继续埋头苦干，贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，着力推进结构性改革，着力推进改革开放，着力促进社会公平正义，着力营造政治上的绿水青山，为全面建成小康社会决胜阶段开好局、起好步。
The year 2016 is the first year when China enters the crucial period to build a moderately well-off society in all all-around way. The 5th Plenary Session of the 18thCPC Central Committee has made clear China's development direction for the next five years. The future is encouraging and inspiring. But happiness does not fall from the sky. We shall establish a spirit to prevail, continue to immerse ourselves in hard work, implement the development concepts of innovation, coordination, green, openness and sharing. We shall put forth the efforts in promoting structural reform, and reform and opening up, promoting social fairness and justice, as well as creating a green political eco-system. We shall get off to a good start as we advance in the crucial period for China to build a moderately well-off society in all all-around way.
全面建成小康社会，13亿人要携手前进。让几千万农村贫困人口生活好起来，是我心中的牵挂。我们吹响了打赢扶贫攻坚战的号角，全党全国要勠力同心，着力补齐这块短板，确保农村所有贫困人口如期摆脱贫困。对所有困难群众，我们都要关爱，让他们从内心感受到温暖。
To build a moderately well-off society in all all-around way, our 1.3 billion people should joint hands and move forward together. A better life for tens of millions of poor people in rural regions is dear to my heart. We have sounded the trumpet to win the battle of poverty alleviation. All Party members and the entire nation should pull together and work hard as a team, put forth efforts to lengthen this short stave. We should make sure that the entire poor population in rural regions can rise out of poverty on schedule. For all the people in difficulties, we should care for them and let them feel the warmth from deep in their hearts.
同志们，朋友们，女士们，先生们，
Comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen,
我们只有一个地球，这是各国人民共同的家园。这一年，我国领导人参加了不少国际会议，开展了不少外交活动，推动“一带一路”建设取得实质性进展，参与了联合国2030年可持续发展议程、应对全球气候变化等国际事务。世界那么大，问题那么多，国际社会期待听到中国声音、看到中国方案，中国不能缺席。面对身陷苦难和战火的人们，我们要有悲悯和同情，更要有责任和行动。中国将永远向世界敞开怀抱，也将尽己所能向面临困境的人们伸出援手，让我们的“朋友圈”越来越大。
We have only one earth, which is the common home of people of all countries. During the past year, Chinese leaders have participated in many international conferences and conducted many diplomatic activities. We have achieved solid progress in promoting the development of the “Belt and Road” initiative. We engaged in many international affairs including the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and issues on dealing with global climate change. The world is so big, and the problems are so many. The international community expects to hear China's voice and see China's plans. China cannot be absent. Seeing the people trapped deep in suffering and war, we should have compassion and sympathy, but also take responsibilities and action. China will always open its arms to the world and will make all efforts possible to extend our helping hand to the people facing difficulties. Let our "circle of friends" grow bigger and bigger.
我衷心希望，国际社会共同努力，多一份平和，多一份合作，变对抗为合作，化干戈为玉帛，共同构建各国人民共有共享的人类命运共同体。
I sincerely hope that the international community can work together. With more peacefulness and more cooperation let's turn confrontation into cooperation, and turn swords into ploughshares. Let's work together to build a community of common destiny of all mankind, which is shared by all people in every country.
谢谢大家。
Thank you all.
73. 习主席的2017新年贺词
2016年即将过去，新年的钟声即将敲响。在这辞旧迎新的美好时刻，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞、澳门特别行政区同胞，向台湾同胞和海外侨胞，向世界各国各地区的朋友们，致以新年的祝福！
The year of 2016 is coming to an end, and the bell of the New Year is going to ring. At this happy moment of ringing out the old year and ringing in the new, I would like to extend my New Year wishes to people from all ethnic groups across China, to our compatriots from Hong Kong and Macao Special Administrative Regions, to our compatriots from Taiwan region and overseas, and to friends from all countries and regions across the world.
2016年，对中国人民来说，是非凡的一年，也是难忘的一年，“十三五”实现了开门红。我们积极践行新发展理念，加快全面建成小康社会进程，推动我国经济增长继续走在世界前列。我们积极推进全面深化改革，供给侧结构性改革迈出重要步伐，国防和军队改革取得重大突破，各领域具有四梁八柱性质的改革主体框架已经基本确立。我们积极推进全面依法治国，深化司法体制改革，全力促进司法公正、维护社会公平正义。我们积极推进全面从严治党，坚定不移“打虎拍蝇”，继续纯净政治生态，党风、政风、社会风气继续好转。
For the Chinese people, the year of 2016 is not only outstanding but also unforgettable. We made a good start of the 13th 5-year National Development Period which spans from 2016 to 2020. We actively carried out the new development concept, accelerated the process of building a moderately prosperous society in an all-round way, and maintained our economic growth ranking the first in the world. We vigorously pushed forward the comprehensive deepening of reform, made important steps in terms of supply-side structural reform, achieved remarkable breakthroughs in the reform of national defense and the military, and the main frame of reform in all fields with "multiple pillars" has been established. We actively promoted the building of a law-based governance of the country, deepened the reform on the judicial system, enhanced judicial justice in an all-round way, and maintained social fairness and justice. We vigorously pushed forward the exercise of our Party's strict governance in every respect, unswervingly cracked down on both "tigers" and "flies", in a bid to purify our political ecosystem, and continue to improve our Party and our government's working style, as well as our social conduct.
2016年，“中国天眼”落成启用，“悟空”号已在轨运行一年，“墨子号”飞向太空，神舟十一号和天宫二号遨游星汉，中国奥运健儿勇创佳绩，中国女排时隔12年再次登上奥运会最高领奖台……还有，通过改革，农村转移人口市民化更便利了，许多贫困地区孩子们上学条件改善了，老百姓异地办理身份证不用来回奔波了，一些长期无户口的人可以登记户口了，很多群众有了自己的家庭医生，每条河流要有“河长”了……这一切，让我们感到欣慰。
In the year of 2016, the Chinese "sky-eye" single-aperture spherical telescope came into use officially, the "WuKong" dark matter detection satellite was under operation in the orbit for a year, the "Mozi" quantum satellite was launched into space, the Shenzhou-11 manned spaceship and the Tiangong-2 space lab traveled through the Galaxy, the Chinese Olympians made outstanding achievements, including the Chinese Women's Volleyball team's becoming the Olympic champion again, which is 12 years after they won the title. Furthermore, our reform measures have made it a little easier for rural migrant workers to settle down in urban areas, and the condition for many children from impoverished areas to receive education has also improved, people don't need to shuttle back and forth between different places when they apply for an identity card in non-native places, some people without permanent household residence for a long time can finally get access to social welfare, many people even have got their own family doctors, and "river chiefs" will be appointed across China for better protection of water resources against pollution in the country. All those efforts make us feel a sense of achievement.
2016年，在美丽的西子湖畔，我们举办了二十国集团领导人第十一次峰会，向世界贡献了中国智慧、中国方案，也向世界展示了美轮美奂的中国印象、中国风采。“一带一路”建设快速推进，亚洲基础设施投资银行正式开张。我们坚持和平发展，坚决捍卫领土主权和海洋权益。谁要在这个问题上做文章，中国人民决不答应！
In the year of 2016, near the beautiful West Lake in Hangzhou city, we held the 11th G20 Leaders' Summit, we shared our thoughts with world leaders and proposed our ideas, and also presented to the world the magnificent, impressive and elegant image of China. The projects under "The Belt and One Road" Initiative was also pushed forward, and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank officially started operation. We have adhered to the peaceful development while resolutely safeguarding the territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests of China. We will never tolerate any act that undermines our territorial sovereignty and maritime rights.
这一年，多地发生的自然灾害和安全事故，给人民生命财产和生产生活造成严重损失，我们深感痛惜。中国维和部队的几名同志壮烈牺牲，为世界和平献出了宝贵生命，我们怀念他们，要把他们的亲人照顾好。
In the year of 2016, natural disasters and industrial accidents took place in many places across China, bringing severe losses on people's life and property, as well as production. We deeply regret those mishaps. On the international front, a few comrades from China's peacekeeping troops have sacrificed their lives while serving their duty to safeguard world peace, we mourn the loss of these soldiers and will repay high tribute to them by taking a good care of their loved ones.
2016年，我们隆重庆祝了中国共产党成立95周年、纪念了中国工农红军长征胜利80周年，我们要牢记为中国人民和中华民族作出贡献的前辈们，不忘初心、继续前进。
In the year of 2016, we held grand ceremonies to mark a series of important anniversaries including the 95th founding anniversary of the Communist Party of China, and the 80th anniversary of the triumph of the Long March by the Red Army of Chinese workers and peasants. We will always cherish the memory of the forefathers who have made great contributions to the Chinese people and the Chinese nation. We will remain committed to our mission, and continue to forge ahead.
“新故相推，日生不滞。”即将到来的2017年，中国共产党将召开第十九次全国代表大会，全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党要继续发力。天上不会掉馅饼，努力奋斗才能梦想成真。
An ancient saying goes, "the world moves on in a never-ending process of the new replacing the old." In the upcoming year of 2017, the Communist Party of China will convene its 19th national congress, an occasion to renew our commitment to the comprehensive building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, to the comprehensive deepening of reforms, to the comprehensive advancement of rule of law, and to the comprehensive exercising of self-governance of the party. There is no such thing as a free lunch, and only hard work will make dreams come true.
小康路上一个都不能掉队！一年来，又有1000多万贫困人口实现了脱贫，奋战在脱贫攻坚一线的同志们辛苦了，我向同志们致敬。新年之际，我最牵挂的还是困难群众，他们吃得怎么样、住得怎么样，能不能过好新年、过好春节。我也了解，部分群众在就业、子女教育、就医、住房等方面还面临一些困难，不断解决好这些问题是党和政府义不容辞的责任。全党全社会要继续关心和帮助贫困人口和有困难的群众，让改革发展成果惠及更多群众，让人民生活更加幸福美满。
We will make sure that no one is left behind on our way to prosperity. Over the past year, 10 million more people across the country have been lifted out of poverty. I would like to pay high tribute and express appreciation to the comrades who have worked tremendously in grass root unites in fighting poverty. As we greet the New Year, there is one thing that remains most dearly attached to my heart. That is those fellow citizens who still live in hardship. I'm seriously concerned and wonder how their food supply and accommodation are being maintained, how they are celebrating the New Year and the Spring Festival. I'm aware that some folks are faced with difficulties in employment, children's education, medical care and housing. To ceaselessly solve those problems remain an unshirkable responsibility for the party and the government. The whole party and the whole society should show continued care and offer help to those fellow citizens living in poverty. We will enable more people to enjoy the fruit of our reforms, and ultimately let all the people in this country live in happiness.
上下同欲者胜。只要我们13亿多人民和衷共济，只要我们党永远同人民站在一起，大家撸起袖子加油干，我们就一定能够走好我们这一代人的长征路。
As one saying goes, "success comes to those who share in one purpose". As long as our 1.3 billion-plus people are pulled together for a common cause, as long as the Party stands together with the people and we roll up our sleeves to work harder, we will surely succeed in a Long March of our generation.
中国人历来主张“世界大同，天下一家”。中国人民不仅希望自己过得好，也希望各国人民过得好。当前，战乱和贫困依然困扰着部分国家和地区，疾病和灾害也时时侵袭着众多的人们。我真诚希望，国际社会携起手来，秉持人类命运共同体的理念，把我们这个星球建设得更加和平、更加繁荣。
The Chinese people have always believed that the world is a commonwealth. We Chinese not only aspire for good living for ourselves, but also hope people in other parts of the world lead a decent life. At present, people in certain countries and regions are still troubled in wars and turbulence; many are suffering from diseases and disasters. We sincerely hope the international community will make concerted effort, work in the belief that mankind shares the same fate as a community, and build our planet into a more peaceful and prosperous place to live in.
让我们满怀信心和期待，一起迎接新年的钟声！
May the chime of the New Year consolidate our confidence and re-ignite our aspiration for an even better tomorrow!
57. 习近平2018年新年贺词
同志们，朋友们，女士们，先生们：
Comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen,
大家好！时光飞逝，转眼我们将迎来2018年。在这里，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞、澳门特别行政区同胞、台湾同胞和海外侨胞致以新年的祝福！我也祝愿世界各国各地区的朋友们万事如意！
Greetings to you all! Time flies and we will soon welcome 2018. Here, I would like to extend my New Year greetings to the people of all ethnic groups in China, to our compatriots in the Hong Kong SAR and the Macao SAR, to our compatriots in Taiwan and to overseas Chinese. I would also like to wish our friends in other countries and regions all the very best.
天道酬勤，日新月异。2017年，我们召开了中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会，开启了全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程。我国国内生产总值迈上80万亿元人民币的台阶，城乡新增就业1300多万人，社会养老保险已经覆盖9亿多人，基本医疗保险已经覆盖13.5亿人，又有1000多万农村贫困人口实现脱贫。“安得广厦千万间，大庇天下寒士俱欢颜！” 340万贫困人口实现易地扶贫搬迁、有了温暖的新家，各类棚户区改造开工数提前完成600万套目标任务。各项民生事业加快发展，生态环境逐步改善，人民群众有了更多获得感、幸福感、安全感。我们朝着实现全面建成小康社会目标又迈进了一大步。
Fortune rewards the diligent and times are changing fast. In 2017, we held the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and embarked on a new journey to fully build a modern socialist China. Our GDP rose to the level of 80 trillion yuan ($ 12.3 trillion). Over 13 million urban and rural jobs were created. Our old-age insurance system now covers more than 900 million people, and 1.35 billion people are covered by basic medical insurance. More than 10 million rural residents were lifted out of poverty. "How I wish I could have ten thousand houses, to provide shelter for all who need it!" 3.4 million people were relocated from poverty-stricken areas and now live in new warm housing. The construction of 6 million apartments in shanty areas has begun ahead of schedule. Various initiatives to improve people's livelihoods have been accelerated, and the environment has steadily improved. People's sense of fulfillment, happiness and security have grown stronger. We have taken another great step in finishing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
科技创新、重大工程建设捷报频传。“慧眼”卫星遨游太空，C919大型客机飞上蓝天，量子计算机研制成功，海水稻进行测产，首艘国产航母下水，“海翼”号深海滑翔机完成深海观测，首次海域可燃冰试采成功，洋山四期自动化码头正式开港，港珠澳大桥主体工程全线贯通，复兴号奔驰在祖国广袤的大地上……我为中国人民迸发出来的创造伟力喝彩！
There has been a steady flow of technological innovation and major engineering feats in China. The X-ray satellite Insight is probing deep space. The C919 large airliner took off into the blue sky. A quantum computer was built and became operational. A trial was conducted for rice production in saline soil. We launched the first Chinese-built aircraft carrier. The "Sea Wings" underwater glider completed its first deep-sea exploration. The first extraction of combustible ice was a success. Phase IV of the Shanghai Yangshan Automated Deep Water Port began operations. The main structure of the cross-sea bridge linking Hong Kong, Zhuhai, and Macao was finished. Fuxing bullet trains now criss-cross China's vast landscape. I applaud the Chinese people for their great creativity.
我们在朱日和联合训练基地举行沙场点兵，纪念中国人民解放军建军90周年。香港回归祖国20周年时，我去了香港，亲眼所见，有祖国做坚强后盾，香港保持了长期繁荣稳定，明天必将更加美好。我们还举行了纪念全民族抗战爆发80周年仪式和南京大屠杀死难者国家公祭仪式，以铭记历史、祈愿和平。
We held a military parade at the Zhurihe training base in commemoration of the 90th anniversary of the founding of the People's Liberation Army. During the 20th anniversary of the Hong Kong SAR's return to the motherland, I visited Hong Kong and saw in person that, with the strong support of the motherland, Hong Kong has retained its long term prosperity and stability. It will undoubtedly have an even better future. We also held a ceremony in commemoration of the 80th anniversary of the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and a state memorial ceremony for the victims of the Nanjing Massacre, to remember history and to pray for peace.
我们在国内主办了几场多边外交活动，包括首届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛、金砖国家领导人厦门会晤、中国共产党与世界政党高层对话会等会议。我还参加了一些世界上的重要多边会议。今年年初，我出席达沃斯世界经济论坛年会，并在联合国日内瓦总部作了讲话，后来又出席了二十国集团领导人峰会、亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议等。在这些不同场合，我同有关各方深入交换意见，大家都赞成共同推动构建人类命运共同体，以造福世界各国人民。
We hosted several multilateral diplomatic events in China, including the first Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, the BRICS Summit in Xiamen, and the CPC in Dialogue with World Political Parties High-Level Meeting. I also took part in some major multilateral meetings overseas. At the beginning of the year, I attended the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, and delivered a speech at the UN Headquarters in Geneva. Later, I attended the G20 Summit and the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting. During these occasions, I had many in-depth exchanges of views with concerted parties and they all supported the joint promotion of building a community of shared future for mankind so as to benefit people across the world.
2017年，我又收到很多群众来信，其中有西藏隆子县玉麦乡的乡亲们，有内蒙古苏尼特右旗乌兰牧骑的队员们，有西安交大西迁的老教授，也有南开大学新入伍的大学生，他们的故事让我深受感动。广大人民群众坚持爱国奉献，无怨无悔，让我感到千千万万普通人最伟大，同时让我感到幸福都是奋斗出来的。
In 2017, I again received many letters from the people, including villagers from the Yumai township in Lhunze county in Tibet autonomous region; members of the Wulanmuqi Art Troupe from the Sonid Right Banner in Inner Mongolia autonomous region; veteran professors from the relocated main body of Xi'an Jiaotong University; and new PLA student recruits from Nankai University. Their stories touched me deeply. The people have made sacrifices for the good of the nation without regrets or complaints. I feel the millions of ordinary Chinese are the greatest, and I also feel that happiness is achieved through hard work.
2018年是全面贯彻中共十九大精神的开局之年。中共十九大描绘了我国发展今后30多年的美好蓝图。九层之台，起于累土。要把这个蓝图变为现实，必须不驰于空想、不骛于虚声，一步一个脚印，踏踏实实干好工作。
The year 2018 marked the first year of fully implementing the spirit of the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, which outlines China's desired development blueprint over the next three decades. Building a high-rise begins with mounds of soil. To translate the blueprint into reality, we have to avoid the distractions of unsubstantial ideas and superficial fame, take one step at a time, and approach our work with a firm footing.
2018年，我们将迎来改革开放40周年。改革开放是当代中国发展进步的必由之路，是实现中国梦的必由之路。我们要以庆祝改革开放40周年为契机，逢山开路，遇水架桥，将改革进行到底。
2018 marks the 40th anniversary of our reform and opening-up, which has been the only path to the development and progress of contemporary China and the only path to the realization of the Chinese Dream. At the significant juncture of the 40th anniversary, we should surmount all obstacles to carry the reform further to its ultimate triumph.
到2020年我国现行标准下农村贫困人口实现脱贫，是我们的庄严承诺。一诺千金。到2020年只有3年的时间，全社会要行动起来，尽锐出战，精准施策，不断夺取新胜利。3年后如期打赢脱贫攻坚战，这在中华民族几千年历史发展上将是首次整体消除绝对贫困现象，让我们一起来完成这项对中华民族、对整个人类都具有重大意义的伟业。
By 2020, China will lift its rural impoverished population out of poverty by current standards. That is our solemn commitment and we will honor it. With three years left until 2020, the whole of society must leap into action and, with concerted efforts and targeted measures, continuously strive for fresh victories. After three years, we will win the final phase of the war on poverty. This will be the first time in thousands of years of Chinese history that extreme poverty has been eliminated. Let us accomplish this great cause of momentous significance for the Chinese nation and all humanity.
当前，各方对人类和平与发展的前景既有期待、也有忧虑，期待中国表明立场和态度。天下一家。中国作为一个负责任大国，也有话要说。中国坚定维护联合国权威和地位，积极履行应尽的国际义务和责任，信守应对全球气候变化的承诺，积极推动共建“一带一路”，始终做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。中国人民愿同各国人民一道，共同开辟人类更加繁荣、更加安宁的美好未来。
Regarding the prospects of humanity's peace and development, there is both expectation and concern; all sides are awaiting a clear Chinese stance. All under heaven are one family. As a responsible major country, China has something to say. China will resolutely uphold the authority and status of the United Nations, actively fulfill China's international obligations and duties, remain firmly committed to China's pledges to tackle climate change, actively push for the Belt and Road Initiative, and always be a builder of world peace, contributor to global development and keeper of international order. The Chinese people are ready to chart out a more prosperous, peaceful future for humanity, with people from other countries.
我们伟大的发展成就由人民创造，应该由人民共享。我了解人民群众最关心的就是教育、就业、收入、社保、医疗、养老、居住、环境等方面的事情，大家有许多收获，也有不少操心事、烦心事。我们的民生工作还有不少不如人意的地方，这就要求我们增强使命感和责任感，把为人民造福的事情真正办好办实。各级党委、政府和干部要把老百姓的安危冷暖时刻放在心上，以造福人民为最大政绩，想群众之所想，急群众之所急，让人民生活更加幸福美满。
China's great achievement of development was made by the people and for the people. I am aware of the people's biggest concerns, such as education, employment, income, social security, healthcare, old-age security, housing and the environment. Though progress has been made, issues of public concern remain. Our efforts at improving people's well-being have not always been satisfactory. That is why we should strengthen our sense of responsibility, and do a good job of ensuring the people's well-being. The Party committees, governments, and officials at all levels must constantly hold in their hearts the interests and concerns of the people, and regard the benefit of the people as their greatest political achievement; they must think for the people, respond to their needs, and work for the greater happiness of the people.
谢谢大家。
Thank you all!
33. 习近平2019年新年贺词：我们都是追梦人！
同志们，朋友们，女士们，先生们：
Comrades, friends, ladies and gentlemen, 
大家好！“岁月不居，时节如流。”2019年马上就要到了，我在北京向大家致以新年的美好祝福！
Greetings to you all! "Time stops for no one, and the seasons keep changing." As we usher in 2019, I'd like to extend my New Year wishes from Beijing to you all! 
2018年，我们过得很充实、走得很坚定。这一年，我们战胜各种风险挑战，推动经济高质量发展，加快新旧动能转换，保持经济运行在合理区间。蓝天、碧水、净土保卫战顺利推进，各项民生事业加快发展，人民生活持续改善。京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展、粤港澳大湾区建设等国家战略稳步实施。我在各地考察时欣喜地看到：长江两岸绿意盎然，建三江万亩大地号稻浪滚滚，深圳前海生机勃勃，上海张江活力四射，港珠澳大桥飞架三地……这些成就是全国各族人民撸起袖子干出来的，是新时代奋斗者挥洒汗水拼出来的。
2018 has been a full year, and we approached it with steadfast determination. Despite all sorts of risks and challenges, we pushed our economy towards high-quality development, sped up the replacement of the old drivers of growth, and kept the major economic indicators within a reasonable range. We made headway in our efforts to protect our blue skies, and to defend our rivers and soil from pollution. And we intensified our efforts to improve people's well-being and steadily raise our standards of living. National strategies such as the coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, the development of the Yangtze River Economic Belt, and the construction of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area were steadfastly implemented. During my inspection tours around the country, I was pleased to see the lush green banks of the Yangtze River, the ocean of rice sprouting at the Jiansanjiang agricultural base, the lively Shenzhen Qianhai Harbor, the bustling Shanghai Zhangjiang High-tech Park, and the bridge that brings together Hong Kong, Zhuhai, and Macao. These achievements are all thanks to the hard work of people from all of China's ethnic groups, who are the trail-blazers of the new era. 
这一年，中国制造、中国创造、中国建造共同发力，继续改变着中国的面貌。嫦娥四号探测器成功发射，第二艘航母出海试航，国产大型水陆两栖飞机水上首飞，北斗导航向全球组网迈出坚实一步。在此，我要向每一位科学家、每一位工程师、每一位“大国工匠”、每一位建设者和参与者致敬！
Over the past year, the combined forces of Chinese manufacturing, Chinese innovation, and Chinese construction, have continued to change the face of the country. We successfully launched the Chang'e-4 lunar probe; our second aircraft carrier set sail on its maiden voyage; our domestically-made large amphibious aircraft performed its first water launch; and the BeiDou Satellite Navigation System has gone global. Let me take this opportunity to salute every scientist, every engineer, and every nation builder who made these achievements possible. 
这一年，脱贫攻坚传来很多好消息。全国又有125个贫困县通过验收脱贫，1000万农村贫困人口摆脱贫困。17种抗癌药降价并纳入医保目录，因病致贫问题正在进一步得到解决。我时常牵挂着奋战在脱贫一线的同志们，280多万驻村干部、第一书记，工作很投入、很给力，一定要保重身体。
We have also made great strides in our poverty alleviation efforts in the past year. Another 125 poor counties and 10 million poverty-stricken rural residents were lifted out of poverty. We reduced the price of 17 cancer-fighting drugs, and included them on our medical insurance list. And we are continuing to tackle the financial strain that can accompany a family member falling ill. Our comrades on the front lines of the fight against poverty are often in my thoughts, including over 2.8 million officials living and working in villages, and the local village leaders. They are devoted to their work and do an awesome job, and I wish them good health. 
我始终惦记着困难群众。在四川凉山三河村，我看望了彝族村民吉好也求、节列俄阿木两家人。在山东济南三涧溪村，我和赵顺利一家围坐一起拉家常。在辽宁抚顺东华园社区，我到陈玉芳家里了解避险搬迁安置情况。在广东清远连樟村，我和贫困户陆奕和交谈脱贫之计。他们真诚朴实的面容至今浮现在我的脑海。新年之际，祝乡亲们的生活蒸蒸日上，越过越红火。
My heart goes out to the people living in hardship. In Sanhe Village of Liangshan in Sichuan province, I visited the families of two villagers from the Yi people. In Sanjianxi Village in Jinan City in Shandong province, I sat down with the family of Zhao Shunli to hear about their day-to-day lives. In the Donghuayuan community in the city of Fushun in Liaoning province, I visited Chen Yufang's family to learn about how they were settling in after being relocated from a dangerous area. In Lianzhang Village in Qingyuan in Guangdong province, I discussed with a villager named Lu Yihe how we could help to relieve his household's poverty. I can vividly recall their down-to-earth sincerity. I would like to wish all of them and their fellow villagers a prosperous and thriving New Year. 
这一年，我们隆重庆祝改革开放40周年，对党和国家机构进行了系统性、整体性、重构性的改革，推出100多项重要改革举措，举办首届中国国际进口博览会，启动建设海南自由贸易试验区。世界看到了改革开放的中国加速度，看到了将改革开放进行到底的中国决心。我们改革的脚步不会停滞，开放的大门只会越开越大。
In 2018, we celebrated the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. We unveiled a comprehensive and systematic overhaul of both Party and State institutions. We launched over 100 major reform measures, held the first China International Import Expo, and began construction of a pilot free trade zone in Hainan. The world has seen China's accelerating reform and opening up, and its determination to carry it forward. China's reforms will never stop, and its doors will only open ever wider.
我注意到，今年，恢复高考后的第一批大学生大多已经退休，大批“00后”进入高校校园。1亿多非户籍人口在城市落户的行动正在继续，1300万人在城镇找到了工作，解决棚户区问题的住房开工了580万套，新市民有了温暖的家。很多港澳台居民拿到了居住证，香港进入了全国高铁网。一个流动的中国，充满了繁荣发展的活力。我们都在努力奔跑，我们都是追梦人。
I noticed that in the past year, most people who enrolled in college when the entrance exam resumed in 1977 have retired. And a large number of people born after 2000 have entered university. More than 100 million people from our rural areas are gradually becoming permanent residents in our cities. 13 million have found jobs, and construction has begun on 5.8 million new homes for those people living in dilapidated houses. Many have already moved into their new warm homes. Many people from Hong Kong, Macao, and Taiwan now have resident permits for the mainland, and Hong Kong has become a stop on our high-speed railway network. China, as a country of people on the move, is energetically pursuing prosperity. We are all running very hard. We are all dream chasers. 
此时此刻，我特别要提到一些闪亮的名字。今年，天上多了颗“南仁东星”，全军英模挂像里多了林俊德和张超两位同志。我们要记住守岛卫国32年的王继才同志，为保护试验平台挺身而出、壮烈牺牲的黄群、宋月才、姜开斌同志，以及其他为国为民捐躯的英雄们。他们是新时代最可爱的人，永远值得我们怀念和学习。
At this point, I'd like to mention several leading lights. Nan Rendong, a Chinese scientist after whom an asteroid was named a few months ago; Lin Junde and Zhang Chao, who joined the long list of exemplary soldiers in the People's Liberation Army; Wang Jicai, who for thirty-two years served on a border island; and those who died protecting an experimental offshore platform - Huang Qun, Song Yuecai, and Jiang Kaibin, and the many other heroes who made the ultimate sacrifice for their country. They are the most admirable people in China's new era, and we should remember their names forever, and learn from their deeds. 
这一年，又有很多新老朋友来到中国。我们举办了博鳌亚洲论坛年会、上海合作组织青岛峰会、中非合作论坛北京峰会等主场外交活动，提出了中国主张，发出了中国声音。我和同事们出访五大洲，参加了许多重要外交活动，同各国领导人进行了广泛交流，巩固了友谊，增进了信任，扩大了我们的朋友圈。
In 2018, China played host to many friends, both old and new. We hosted the annual Boao Forum for Asia, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization Summit in Qingdao, as well as the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation. We put China's proposals on the table and made our voice heard at these and other diplomatic events. I and my colleagues visited five continents and attended many important diplomatic events. We spoke with state leaders about wide-ranging issues, we strengthened our friendships, we enhanced mutual trust, and we enlarged our circle of friends. 
2019年，我们将隆重庆祝中华人民共和国70周年华诞。70年披荆斩棘，70年风雨兼程。人民是共和国的坚实根基，人民是我们执政的最大底气。一路走来，中国人民自力更生、艰苦奋斗，创造了举世瞩目的中国奇迹。新征程上，不管乱云飞渡、风吹浪打，我们都要紧紧依靠人民，坚持自力更生、艰苦奋斗，以坚如磐石的信心、只争朝夕的劲头、坚韧不拔的毅力，一步一个脚印把前无古人的伟大事业推向前进。
In 2019, we will celebrate the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. Our country has braved thorny paths and confronted stormy weather over the past seventy years. Our people are the country's solid foundation and our main source of confidence to govern. Through the years, the Chinese people have been self-reliant and worked diligently to create Chinese miracles that the world has marveled at. And now, looking forward, despite the complexities and difficulties we may face on the road ahead, we shall always closely rely on the people and stick to self-reliance and hard work. With rock-solid confidence, and racing against time with unwavering determination, we will carry forward our unprecedented great cause one resolute step after another, and leave enduring footprints behind us. 
2019年，有机遇也有挑战，大家还要一起拼搏、一起奋斗。减税降费政策措施要落地生根，让企业轻装上阵。要真诚尊重各种人才，充分激发他们创新创造活力。要倾听基层干部心声，让敢担当有作为的干部有干劲、有奔头。农村1000多万贫困人口的脱贫任务要如期完成，还得咬定目标使劲干。要关爱退役军人，他们为保家卫国作出了贡献。这个时候，快递小哥、环卫工人、出租车司机以及千千万万的劳动者，还在辛勤工作，我们要感谢这些美好生活的创造者、守护者。大家辛苦了。
2019 will see both opportunities and challenges that will require us to work together shoulder to shoulder. Policies to cut taxes and fees must take root to ease the burden on enterprises. We must show our sincere appreciation to talent of all kinds, and stimulate their creative energy. We must lend an ear to our officials at the grassroots, and bring energy and greater purpose to those who are ready to commit to making a difference. To achieve our task of lifting another 10 million-plus rural residents out of poverty as planned, we shall remain focused and work hard on this. We shall take better care of our military veterans who have done much to keep the motherland safe. Even as we speak, there are deliverymen, street cleaners, taxi drivers, and countless others who are hard at work. We should thank these workers who contribute to the creation of our beautiful society. Their hard work is much appreciated. 
放眼全球，我们正面临百年未有之大变局。无论国际风云如何变幻，中国维护国家主权和安全的信心和决心不会变，中国维护世界和平、促进共同发展的诚意和善意不会变。我们将积极推动共建“一带一路”，继续推动构建人类命运共同体，为建设一个更加繁荣美好的世界而不懈努力。
Looking at the world at large, we're facing a period of major change never seen in a century. No matter what these changes bring, China will remain resolute and confident in its defense of its national sovereignty and security. And China's sincerity and goodwill to safeguard world peace and promote common development will remain unchanged. We will continue to push ahead with the joint construction of the Belt and Road Initiative, and continue to advocate for the development of a community of shared future for mankind. And we will work tirelessly for a more prosperous and beautiful world. 
新年的钟声即将敲响，让我们满怀信心和期待，一同迎接2019年的到来。
As we ring in the New Year, let's embrace 2019 with confidence and anticipation. 
祝福中国！祝福世界！
Best wishes to China! And best wishes to the world! 
谢谢大家！
Thank you!
19. 习近平2020年新年贺词：只争朝夕，不负韶华
2020年就要到了，我在首都北京向大家送上新年的美好祝福！
The year 2020 is arriving. From China's capital Beijing, I would like to extend my New Year wishes to you all! 
2019年，我们用汗水浇灌收获，以实干笃定前行。高质量发展平稳推进，我国国内生产总值预计将接近100万亿元人民币、人均将迈上1万美元的台阶。三大攻坚战取得关键进展。京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展、粤港澳大湾区建设、长三角一体化发展按下快进键，黄河流域生态保护和高质量发展成为国家战略。全国将有340个左右贫困县摘帽、1000多万人实现脱贫。嫦娥四号在人类历史上第一次登陆月球背面，长征五号遥三运载火箭成功发射，雪龙2号首航南极，北斗导航全球组网进入冲刺期，5G商用加速推出，北京大兴国际机场“凤凰展翅”……这些成就凝结着新时代奋斗者的心血和汗水，彰显了不同凡响的中国风采、中国力量。
In 2019, we sweated and we toiled as we pressed ahead with concrete efforts for achievements. Thanks to our steady pursuit of high-quality development, China's GDP is expected to edge close to 100 trillion yuan with the per capita figure reaching the level of 10,000 US dollars. Significant breakthroughs have been achieved in three tough battles. Coordinated development in the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei Region, the Yangtze River Economic Belt, the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, and the Yangtze River Delta, all accelerated. Ecological protection and high-quality development in the Yellow River basin have become national strategies. About 340 impoverished counties and more than 10 million people have been lifted out of poverty. Our lunar probe Chang'e-4, for the first time in human history, landed on the far side of the moon; the Long March-5 Y3 rocket was successfully launched; the Xuelong 2 icebreaker set sail on its maiden voyage to the Antarctic; the construction of the global network of the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System is sprinting towards the finish line; the commercial application of 5G technology is accelerating; the Beijing Daxing International Airport spread its wings like a phoenix… all these achievements are the result of the efforts and sweat of those who strive in the new era, and they demonstrate extraordinary Chinese splendor and Chinese strength. 
一年来，改革开放不断催生发展活力。党和国家机构改革圆满完成。增设一批自由贸易试验区和上海自由贸易试验区新片区。科创板顺利启动推进。减税降费总额超过2万亿元。个人所得税起征点提高了，老百姓常用的许多药品降价了，网络提速降费使刷屏更快了，垃圾分类引领着低碳生活新时尚。“基层减负年”让基层干部轻装上阵。放眼神州大地，处处都有新变化新气象。
Over the past year, reform and opening-up has continuously generated vigor for development. The reform of Party and government institutions has been successfully completed. We have set up another batch of pilot free trade zones, and expanded the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone. The Science and Technology Innovation Board was launched smoothly. We have cut taxes and fees by more than 2 trillion yuan, and raised the individual income tax threshold. Many types of commonly-used medicines have seen their prices drop, while cheaper and faster internet connection has enabled faster flow of information. Garbage sorting is leading the new trend of a low-carbon lifestyle. This year we have also streamlined the work of officials at the grassroots level. New changes are taking place everywhere and the country is taking on a fresh look. 
一年来，国防和军队改革扎实推进，人民军队展现出新时代强军风貌。我们进行国庆大阅兵，举行海军、空军成立70周年庆祝活动，举办第七届世界军人运动会。首艘国产航母正式列装。人民子弟兵永远是保卫祖国的钢铁长城，让我们向守护家园的忠诚卫士们致敬！
Over the past year, we have steadily pushed forward reforms in our national defense and military systems. The armed forces have taken on a new look of a strong army in the new era. We held a grand military parade on National Day, celebrated the 70th anniversary of the establishment of the Navy and the Air Force, and also hosted the 7th Military World Games. The country's first self-developed aircraft carrier was commissioned. The people's army will always serve as a great wall of steel that guards our motherland. Let's salute those loyal soldiers who safeguard our home. 
2019年，最难忘的是隆重庆祝新中国成立70周年。我们为共和国70年的辉煌成就喝彩，被爱国主义的硬核力量震撼。阅兵方阵威武雄壮，群众游行激情飞扬，天安门广场成了欢乐的海洋。大江南北披上红色盛装，人们脸上洋溢着自豪的笑容，《我和我的祖国》在大街小巷传唱。爱国主义情感让我们热泪盈眶，爱国主义精神构筑起民族的脊梁。这一切，汇聚成礼赞新中国、奋斗新时代的前进洪流，给我们增添了无穷力量。
The most memorable moment of 2019 was the celebrations for the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. We cheered for the glorious achievements the People’s Republic has made over the past 70 years, and were overwhelmed by the sheer force of patriotism. The formations during the military parade were powerful, and the mass pageant thrilling. Tiananmen Square was turned into a sea of happiness. All of China was arrayed in red with proud smiles on all faces as the song "My Motherland and I" played throughout the streets and alleys. Patriotic feelings brought tears to our eyes, and patriotic spirit forms the backbone of the Chinese nation. All these merge into a surging current that sings an ode to New China and inspires us to work harder in the new era, filling us with boundless energy. 
一年来，我去了不少地方。雄安新区画卷徐徐铺展，天津港蓬勃兴盛，北京城市副中心生机勃发，内蒙古大草原壮美亮丽，河西走廊穿越千年、历久弥新，九曲黄河天高水阔、雄浑安澜，黄浦江两岸物阜民丰、流光溢彩……祖国各地一派欣欣向荣的景象。我沿着中国革命的征程砥砺初心。从江西于都红军长征集结出发地到河南新县鄂豫皖苏区首府革命博物馆，从甘肃高台西路军纪念碑到北京香山革命纪念地，每个地方都让我思绪万千，初心和使命是我们走好新时代长征路的不竭动力。
Over the past year, I have visited many places. Construction of Xiong'an New Area is progressing, Tianjin Port is booming, Beijing's sub-center is thriving, grasslands in Inner Mongolia are splendid, the Hexi Corridor, after thousands of years, is teeming with new life. The winding Yellow River, where the sky is high and waters are wide, sometimes turbulent, sometimes calm; on both banks of the Huangpu River, there is plenty and prosperity, and ribbons of light shine in the night. Everything is flourishing across our motherland. I traced the routes of China's revolution to strengthen my original aspiration. From Yudu in Jiangxi province where the Red Army gathered for their Long March, to the Revolution Museum in Xinxian county in Henan province, the former capital of the Hubei-Henan-Anhui revolutionary base, from the Monument to the West Route Army in Gaotai, Gansu province, to the revolutionary memorial site in the Fragrant Hills in Beijing, all these places aroused many feelings and thoughts in my mind. Our original aspiration and mission are our inexhaustible source of motivation during our Long March of the new era. 
同往常一样，我无论多忙，都要抽时间到乡亲们中走一走看一看。大家跟我说了很多心里话，我一直记在心上。云南贡山独龙族群众、福建寿宁县下党乡的乡亲、“王杰班”全体战士、北京体育大学研究生冠军班同学、澳门小朋友和义工老人，给我写了信。我在回信中肯定了大家取得的成绩，也表达了良好祝愿。
As usual, no matter how busy I was, I spent time visiting people in the countryside. People shared many of their innermost thoughts with me, and I always keep them in mind. I have also received letters from villagers of the Dulong ethnic group in Gongshan, Yunnan province; residents of Xiadang township, Shouning County in Fujian province; soldiers of the Wang Jie Squad; the graduate students of the Class of Champions at Beijing Sport University; and children and senior volunteers from Macao. In my reply letters, I applauded the achievements they had made and sent my best wishes. 
一年来，许多人和事感动着我们。一辈子深藏功名、初心不改的张富清，把青春和生命献给脱贫事业的黄文秀，为救火而捐躯的四川木里31名勇士，用自己身体保护战友的杜富国，以十一连胜夺取世界杯冠军的中国女排……许许多多无怨无悔、倾情奉献的无名英雄，他们以普通人的平凡书写了不平凡的人生。
Over the past year, many people and their stories touched us deeply. Zhang Fuqing has kept a low profile and stayed true to his original heart despite the great contributions he's made to the nation; Huang Wenxiu dedicated her youth and life to poverty alleviation; 31 firefighters sacrificed their lives in the line of duty in Muli, Sichuan province; Du Fuguo sacrificed himself to protect his teammates; China's Women's National Volleyball Team won the World Cup in an eleven-match winning streak. Numerous unsung heroes, with neither complaint nor regret, work with dedication. They are ordinary people living extraordinary lives. 
2019年，中国继续张开双臂拥抱世界。我们主办了第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛、北京世界园艺博览会、亚洲文明对话大会、第二届中国国际进口博览会，向世界展示了一个文明、开放、包容的中国。我同很多国家元首和政府首脑会晤，分享了中国主张，增进了友谊，深化了共识。世界上又有一些国家同我国建交，我国建交国达到180个。我们的朋友遍天下！
In the year of 2019, China continued to open its arms wide to embrace the world. We hosted the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, the Beijing International Horticultural Exhibition, the Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations, and the second China International Import Expo, showcasing a civilized, open and inclusive China to the rest of the world. I held meetings with many heads of state and government, sharing with them China's proposals, promoting friendship and deepening consensus. A few countries joined hands with us. The number of countries that have diplomatic ties with China now stands at 180. We have friends in every corner of the world. 
2020年是具有里程碑意义的一年。我们将全面建成小康社会，实现第一个百年奋斗目标。2020年也是脱贫攻坚决战决胜之年。冲锋号已经吹响。我们要万众一心加油干，越是艰险越向前，把短板补得再扎实一些，把基础打得再牢靠一些，坚决打赢脱贫攻坚战，如期实现现行标准下农村贫困人口全部脱贫、贫困县全部摘帽。
2020 will be a year of milestone significance. We will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects and realize the first centenary goal. 2020 will also be a year of decisive victory for the elimination of poverty. The bugle has sounded. United as one, we shall work harder. The greater the difficulties are, the further we advance, strengthening our weak links even more and laying a more solid foundation to win the hard battle against poverty with determination, to lift all impoverished rural residents and counties out of poverty by current standards as scheduled. 
前几天，我出席了澳门回归祖国20周年庆祝活动，我为澳门繁荣稳定感到欣慰。澳门的成功实践表明，“一国两制”完全行得通、办得到、得人心。近几个月来，香港局势牵动着大家的心。没有和谐稳定的环境，怎会有安居乐业的家园！真诚希望香港好、香港同胞好。香港繁荣稳定是香港同胞的心愿，也是祖国人民的期盼。
Several days ago, I attended the celebrations marking the 20th anniversary of Macao's return to the motherland and felt heartened for the prosperity and stability in Macao. The successful practice of Macao indicates that the principle of "one country, two systems" is fully applicable, achievable, and popular. In recent months, our hearts have been concerned about the situation in Hong Kong. Without a harmonious and stable environment, how can there be a home where people can live and work happily! We sincerely hope for the best for Hong Kong and Hong Kong compatriots. Hong Kong's prosperity and stability is the wish of Hong Kong compatriots and the expectation of people of our motherland. 
历史长河奔腾不息，有风平浪静，也有波涛汹涌。我们不惧风雨，也不畏险阻。中国将坚定不移走和平发展道路，坚定不移维护世界和平、促进共同发展。我们愿同世界各国人民携起手来，积极共建“一带一路”，推动构建人类命运共同体，为创造人类美好未来而不懈努力。
Human history, like a river, runs forever, witnessing both peaceful moments and great disturbances. We are not afraid of winds and rains, or any kind of difficulties. China is determined to walk along the road of peaceful development and will resolutely safeguard world peace and promote common development. We are willing to join hands with people of all countries in the world to build together the Belt and Road Initiative, and push forward the building of a community with a shared future for mankind, and make unremitting efforts for the creation of a beautiful future for mankind. 
此时此刻，还有许多人在坚守岗位，许多人在守护平安，许多人在辛勤劳作。大家辛苦了！
At this moment, many people are still at their posts, many people are safeguarding peace and security, and many people are working tirelessly. Your hard work is greatly appreciated. 
让我们只争朝夕，不负韶华，共同迎接2020年的到来。
Let's seize the day and live it to the full, and greet the arrival of the year 2020 together. 
祝大家新年快乐！
I wish you all a happy new year!
138. 习近平在博鳌亚洲论坛2013年会上的主旨演讲
尊敬的各位元首、政府首脑、议长、国际组织负责人、部长，博鳌亚洲论坛理事会各位成员，各位来宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们。
Your Excellencies, Heads of State and Government, Speakers of Parliament, Heads of International Organizations, Ministers, Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
椰风暖人，海阔天高。在这美好的季节里，同大家相聚在美丽的海南岛，参加博鳌亚洲论坛2013年年会，我感到十分高兴。首先，我谨代表中国政府和人民，并以我个人的名义，向各位朋友的到来，表示诚挚的欢迎！对年会的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！
In this balmy season with clear sky and warm, coconut-scented breeze, I am so glad to meet all of you at the Annual Conference 2013 of the Boao Forum for Asia here in Hainan, a picturesque island embraced by the vast ocean.
Let me begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and also in my own name, a heartfelt welcome to you and warm congratulations on the opening of the Annual Conference of the Boao Forum.
12年来，博鳌亚洲论坛日益成为具有全球影响的重要论坛。在中国文化中，每12年是一个生肖循环，照此说来，博鳌亚洲论坛正处在一个新的起点上，希望能更上一层楼。本届年会以“革新、责任、合作：亚洲寻求共同发展”为主题，很有现实意义。相信大家能够充分发表远见卓识，共商亚洲和世界发展大计，为促进本地区乃至全球和平、稳定、繁荣贡献智慧和力量。
In the past 12 years since its birth, the Boao Forum for Asia has become an important forum with growing global influence. In the Chinese culture, 12 years form a zodiac cycle. In this sense, the Boao Forum has reached a new starting point and I hope it will scale an even greater height.
The theme of the current annual conference, namely, "Asia Seeking Development for All: Restructuring, Responsibility and Cooperation", is a highly relevant one. I hope you will engage in an in-depth discussion on promoting development in Asia and beyond and thus contributing, with your vision and commitment, to peace, stability and prosperity in Asia and the world at large.
当前，国际形势继续发生深刻复杂变化。世界各国相互联系日益紧密、相互依存日益加深，遍布全球的众多发展中国家、几十亿人口正在努力走向现代化，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流更加强劲。同时，天下仍很不太平，发展问题依然突出，世界经济进入深度调整期，整体复苏艰难曲折，国际金融领域仍然存在较多风险，各种形式的保护主义上升，各国调整经济结构面临不少困难，全球治理机制有待进一步完善。实现各国共同发展，依然任重而道远。
The world today is experiencing profound and complex changes. Countries have become increasingly inter-connected and inter-dependent. Several billion people in a large number of developing countries are embracing modernization. The trend of the times, namely, peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit, is gaining momentum.
On the other hand, our world is far from peaceful. Development remains a major challenge; the global economy has entered a period of profound readjustment, and its recovery remains elusive. The international financial sector is fraught with risks, protectionism of various forms is on the rise, countries still face many difficulties in adjusting economic structure, and the global governance mechanisms call for improvement. Achieving common development for all countries remains an uphill battle.
亚洲是当今世界最具发展活力和潜力的地区之一，亚洲发展同其他各大洲发展息息相关。亚洲国家积极探索适合本国情况的发展道路，在实现自身发展的同时有力促进了世界发展。亚洲与世界其他地区共克时艰，合作应对国际金融危机，成为拉动世界经济复苏和增长的重要引擎，近年来对世界经济增长的贡献率已超过50%，给世界带来了信心。亚洲同世界其他地区的区域次区域合作展现出勃勃生机和美好前景。
Asia is one of the most dynamic and most promising regions in the world, and its development is closely connected with the development of other continents. The Asian countries have energetically explored development paths suited to their national conditions and greatly boosted global development through their own development. Working side by side with the rest of the world in time of difficulty to tackle the international financial crisis, Asia has emerged as an important engine driving world economic recovery and growth. In recent years, Asia has contributed to over 50 percent of global growth, instilling much needed confidence in the world. What is more, Asia's cooperation with other regions of the world at regional and sub-regional levels has great vitality and promising prospects.
当然，我们也清醒地看到，亚洲要谋求更大发展、更好推动本地区和世界其他地区共同发展，依然面临不少困难和挑战，还需要爬一道道的坡、过一道道的坎。
But we should also be keenly aware that Asia still faces many difficulties and challenges in boosting both its own development and joint development with other regions. The road ahead remains a bumpy and twisting one.
亚洲发展需要乘势而上、转型升级。对亚洲来说，发展仍然是头等大事，发展仍然是解决面临的突出矛盾和问题的关键，迫切需要转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构，提高经济发展质量和效益，在此基础上不断提高人民生活水平。
Asia needs to transform and upgrade its development model in keeping with the trend of the times. Sustaining development is still of paramount importance to Asia, because only development holds the key to solving major problems and difficulties it faces. It is important that we should shift the growth model, adjust the economic structure, make development more cost effective and make life better for our people.
亚洲稳定需要共同呵护、破解难题。亚洲稳定面临着新的挑战，热点问题此起彼伏，传统安全威胁和非传统安全威胁都有所表现，实现本地区长治久安需要地区国家增强互信、携手努力。
We need to make concerted efforts to resolve major difficulties to ensure stability in Asia. Stability in Asia now faces new challenges, as hotspot issues keep emerging, and both traditional and non-traditional security threats exist. The Asian countries need to increase mutual trust and work together to ensure durable peace and stability in our region.
亚洲合作需要百尺竿头、更进一步。加强亚洲地区合作的机制和倡议很多，各方面想法和主张丰富多样，协调各方面利益诉求、形成能够保障互利共赢的机制需要更好增进理解、凝聚共识、充实内容、深化合作。
We need to build on past success and make new progress in promoting cooperation in Asia. There are many mechanisms and initiatives for enhancing cooperation in Asia, and a lot of ideas on boosting such cooperation are being explored by various parties. What we need to do is to enhance mutual understanding, build consensus, and enrich and deepen cooperation so as to strike a balance among the interests of various parties and build mechanisms that bring benefits to all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
人类只有一个地球，各国共处一个世界。共同发展是持续发展的重要基础，符合各国人民长远利益和根本利益。我们生活在同一个地球村，应该牢固树立命运共同体意识，顺应时代潮流，把握正确方向，坚持同舟共济，推动亚洲和世界发展不断迈上新台阶。
Mankind has only one earth, and it is home to all countries. Common development, which is the very foundation of sustainable development, serves the long-term and fundamental interests of all the people in the world. As members of the same global village, we should foster a sense of community of common destiny, follow the trend of the times, keep to the right direction, stick together in time of difficulty and ensure that development in Asia and the rest of the world reaches new highs.
第一，勇于变革创新，为促进共同发展提供不竭动力。长期以来，各国各地区在保持稳定、促进发展方面形成了很多好经验好做法。对这些好经验好做法，要继续发扬光大。同时，世间万物，变动不居。“明者因时而变，知者随事而制。”要摒弃不合时宜的旧观念，冲破制约发展的旧框框，让各种发展活力充分迸发出来。要加大转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构力度，更加注重发展质量，更加注重改善民生。要稳定推进国际经济金融体系改革，完善全球治理机制，为世界经济健康稳定增长提供保障。亚洲历来具有自我变革活力，要勇做时代的弄潮儿，使亚洲变革和世界发展相互促进、相得益彰。
First, we should boldly break new ground so as to create an inexhaustible source of power for boosting common development. Over the years, many countries and regions have developed a lot of good practices in maintaining stability and promoting growth. We should continue such practices. However, nothing in the world remains constant, and as a Chinese saying goes, a wise man changes as time and event change. We should abandon the outdated mindset, break away from the old confines that fetter development and unleash all the potential for development. We should redouble efforts to shift the growth model and adjust the economic structure, raise the quality of development and make life better for the people. We should steadily advance the reform of the international economic and financial systems, improve global governance mechanisms and provide support to sound and stable global economic growth. Asia, with its long-standing capacity for adjusting to change, should ride on the waves of the times and make changes in Asia and global development reinforce and benefit each other.
第二，同心维护和平，为促进共同发展提供安全保障。和平是人民的永恒期望。和平犹如空气和阳光，受益而不觉，失之则难存。没有和平，发展就无从谈起。国家无论大小、强弱、贫富，都应该做和平的维护者和促进者，不能这边搭台、那边拆台，而应该相互补台、好戏连台。国际社会应该倡导综合安全、共同安全、合作安全的理念，使我们的地球村成为共谋发展的大舞台，而不是相互角力的竞技场，更不能为一己之私把一个地区乃至世界搞乱。各国交往频繁，磕磕碰碰在所难免，关键是要坚持通过对话协商与和平谈判，妥善解决矛盾分歧，维护相互关系发展大局。
Second, we should work together to uphold peace so as to provide security safeguard for boosting common development. Peace is the ever-lasting wish of our people. Peace, like air and sunshine, is hardly noticed when people are benefiting from it. But none of us can live without it. Without peace, development is out of the question. Countries, whether big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, should all contribute their share to maintaining and enhancing peace. Rather than undercutting each other's efforts, countries should complement each other and work for joint progress. The international community should advocate the vision of comprehensive security, common security and cooperative security so as to turn our global village into a big stage for common development, rather than an arena where gladiators fight each other. And no one should be allowed to throw a region and even the whole world into chaos for selfish gains. With growing interaction among countries, it is inevitable that they encounter frictions here and there. What is important is that they should resolve differences through dialogue, consultation and peaceful negotiations in the larger interest of the sound growth of their relations.
第三，着力推进合作，为促进共同发展提供有效途径。“一花独放不是春，百花齐放春满园。”世界各国联系紧密、利益交融，要互通有无、优势互补，在追求本国利益时兼顾他国合理关切，在谋求自身发展中促进各国共同发展，不断扩大共同利益汇合点。要加强南南合作和南北对话，推动发展中国家和发达国家平衡发展，夯实世界经济长期稳定发展基础。要积极创造更多合作机遇，提高合作水平，让发展成果更好惠及各国人民，为促进世界经济增长多作贡献。
Third, we should boost cooperation as an effective vehicle for enhancing common development. As we often say in China, a single flower does not make spring, while one hundred flowers in full blossom bring spring to the garden. All countries in the world are closely linked and share converging interests. They should both pool and share their strengths. While pursuing its own interests, a country should accommodate the legitimate concerns of others. In pursuing their own development, countries should promote the common development of all and expand common interests among them. We should enhance South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue, promote balanced development of the developing and developed countries and consolidate the foundation for sustaining stable growth of the global economy. We need to work vigorously to create more cooperation opportunities, upgrade cooperation, and deliver more development dividends to our people and contribute more to global growth.
第四，坚持开放包容，为促进共同发展提供广阔空间。“海纳百川，有容乃大。”我们应该尊重各国自主选择社会制度和发展道路的权利，消除疑虑和隔阂，把世界多样性和各国差异性转化为发展活力和动力。我们要秉持开放精神，积极借鉴其他地区发展经验，共享发展资源，推进区域合作。进入新世纪10多年来，亚洲地区内贸易额从8000亿美元增长到3万亿美元，亚洲同世界其他地区贸易额从1.5万亿美元增长到4.8万亿美元，这表明亚洲合作是开放的，区域内合作和同其他地区合作并行不悖，大家都从合作中得到了好处。亚洲应该欢迎域外国家为本地区稳定和发展发挥建设性作用，同时，域外国家也应该尊重亚洲的多样性特点和已经形成的合作传统，形成亚洲发展同其他地区发展良性互动、齐头并进的良好态势。
Fourth, we should remain open and inclusive so as to create broad space for enhancing common development. The ocean is vast because it admits hundreds of rivers. We should respect the right of a country to independently choose its social system and development path, remove distrust and misgivings and turn the diversity of our world and difference among countries into dynamism and driving force for development. We should keep an open mind, draw upon development practices of other continents, share development resources and promote regional cooperation. During the first decade and more of the new century, trade within Asia has increased from $800 billion to $3 trillion, and its trade with other regions has grown from $1.5 trillion to $4.8 trillion. This shows that cooperation in Asia is open and it goes hand in hand with Asia's cooperation with other regions, and everyone has benefited from such cooperation. Asia should welcome non-Asian countries to play a constructive role in ensuring stability and development of the region. Likewise, the non-Asian countries should respect Asia's diversity and its long-standing tradition of cooperation. This will create a dynamic environment in which Asia and other regions enjoy mutually reinforcing progress.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！中国是亚洲和世界大家庭的重要成员。中国发展离不开亚洲和世界，亚洲和世界繁荣稳定也需要中国。
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,China is an important member of the Asian family and the global family. China cannot develop itself in isolation from the rest of Asia and the world. On their part, the rest of Asia and the world cannot enjoy prosperity and stability without China.
去年11月，中国共产党召开了第十八次全国代表大会，明确了中国今后一个时期的发展蓝图。我们的奋斗目标是，到2020年国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入在2010年的基础上翻一番，全面建成小康社会；到本世纪中叶建成富强民主文明和谐的社会主义现代化国家，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。展望未来，我们充满信心。
In November last year, the Communist Party of China held its 18th National Congress, which drew the blueprint for China's development in the years to come. The main goals we set for China are as follows: By 2020, China's GDP and per capita incomes for urban and rural residents will double the 2010 figures, and the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects will be completed. By the mid-21st century, China will be turned into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious; and the Chinese dream, namely, the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation, will be realized. Looking ahead, we are full of confidence in China's future.
我们也认识到，中国依然是世界上最大的发展中国家，中国发展仍面临着不少困难和挑战，要使全体中国人民都过上美好生活，还需要付出长期不懈的努力。我们将坚持改革开放不动摇，牢牢把握转变经济发展方式这条主线，集中精力把自己的事情办好，不断推进社会主义现代化建设。
On the other hand, we are aware that China remains the world's largest developing country, and it faces many difficulties and challenges on its road to progress. We need to make relentless efforts in the years ahead to deliver a better life to all our people. We are unwaveringly committed to reform and opening up, and we will concentrate on the major task of shifting the growth model, focus on running our own affairs well and make continued efforts to boost the socialist modernization drive.
“亲望亲好，邻望邻好。”中国将坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，巩固睦邻友好，深化互利合作，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家。
As a Chinese saying goes, neighbors wish each other well, just as loved ones do to each other. China will continue to promote friendship and partnership with its neighbors, consolidate friendly ties and deepen mutually beneficial cooperation with them and ensure that its development will bring even greater benefits to its neighbors.
我们将大力促进亚洲和世界发展繁荣。新世纪以来，中国同周边国家贸易额由1000多亿美元增至1.3万亿美元，已成为众多周边国家的最大贸易伙伴、最大出口市场、重要投资来源地。中国同亚洲和世界的利益融合达到前所未有的广度和深度。当前和今后一个时期，中国经济将继续保持健康发展势头，国内需求特别是消费需求将持续扩大，对外投资也将大幅增加。据测算，今后5年，中国将进口10万亿美元左右的商品，对外投资规模将达到5000亿美元，出境旅游有可能超过4亿人次。中国越发展，越能给亚洲和世界带来发展机遇。
China will vigorously promote development and prosperity in both Asia and the world. Since the beginning of the new century, China's trade with its neighbors has grown from $100 billion and more to $1.3 trillion. China has become the largest trading partner, the biggest export market and a major source of investment of many of these countries. China's interests have never been so closely connected with those of the rest of Asia and the world in both scope and depth. Going forward, China will maintain robust growth momentum. Its domestic demand, particularly consumption-driven demand, will continue to grow, and its outbound investment will increase substantially. It is projected that in the coming five years, China's import will reach some $10 trillion, its outbound investment will reach $500 billion and the number of its outbound tourists may well exceed 400 million. The more China grows itself, the more development opportunities it will create for the rest of Asia and the world.
我们将坚定维护亚洲和世界和平稳定。中国人民对战争和动荡带来的苦难有着刻骨铭心的记忆，对和平有着孜孜不倦的追求。中国将通过争取和平国际环境发展自己，又以自身发展维护和促进世界和平。中国将继续妥善处理同有关国家的分歧和摩擦，在坚定捍卫国家主权、安全、领土完整的基础上，努力维护同周边国家关系和地区和平稳定大局。中国将在国际和地区热点问题上继续发挥建设性作用，坚持劝和促谈，为通过对话谈判妥善处理有关问题作出不懈努力。
We are firm in our resolve to uphold peace and stability in Asia and the world. Knowing too well the agonizing sufferings inflicted by war and turbulence, the Chinese people deeply cherish peace. China will continue to develop itself by securing a peaceful international environment and, at the same time, uphold and promote world peace through its own development. China will continue to properly handle differences and frictions with relevant countries. On the basis of firmly upholding its sovereignty, security and territorial integrity, China will maintain good relations with its neighbors and overall peace and stability in our region. China will continue to play a constructive role in addressing regional and global hotspot issues, encourage dialogue and talks for peace, and work tirelessly to solve the relevant issues properly through dialogue and negotiations.
我们将积极推动亚洲和世界范围的地区合作。中国将加快同周边地区的互联互通建设，积极探讨搭建地区性融资平台，促进区域内经济融合，提高地区竞争力。中国将积极参与亚洲区域合作进程，坚持推进同亚洲之外其他地区和国家的区域次区域合作。中国将继续倡导并推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，加强同各国的双向投资，打造合作新亮点。中国将坚定支持亚洲地区对其他地区的开放合作，更好促进本地区和世界其他地区共同发展。中国致力于缩小南北差距，支持发展中国家增强自主发展能力。
We will energetically promote regional cooperation in Asia and around the world. China will increase connectivity with its neighbors, actively explore the building of a regional financing platform, advance economic integration within the region and thus increase its competitiveness. China will take an active part in Asia's regional cooperation process and promote regional and sub-regional cooperation with non-Asian regions and countries. China will continue to champion and promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, step up bilateral investment with other countries and boost cooperation in new priority areas. China firmly supports Asia's opening up to and cooperation with other regions so as to promote their common development. China is committed to narrowing the North-South gap and supports other developing countries in their efforts to enhance capacity for self development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！亲仁善邻，是中国自古以来的传统。亚洲和世界和平发展、合作共赢的事业没有终点，只有一个接一个的新起点。中国愿同五大洲的朋友们携手努力，共同创造亚洲和世界的美好未来，造福亚洲和世界人民！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
Promoting good neighborliness is a time-honored tradition of China. To enhance peaceful development and win-win cooperation in Asia and the world is a race that has one starting point after another and knows no finishing line. We in China are ready to join hands with friends from across the world in a concerted effort to create a bright future for both Asia and the world and bring benefit to the Asian people and the people around the world.
最后，预祝年会取得圆满成功！谢谢大家！
In conclusion, I wish the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2013 every success!

128. 习近平在布鲁日欧洲学院的演讲
在布鲁日欧洲学院的演讲
（2014年4月1日，布鲁日）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Speech at the College of Europe
Chinese President Xi Jinping
Bruges, 1 April 2014
尊敬的菲利普国王夫妇，
尊敬的范龙佩主席，
尊敬的迪吕波首相，
尊敬的德维戈主席、莫纳尔院长，
尊敬的各位使节，
老师们，同学们，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Majesties King Philippe and Queen Mathilde,
President Herman Van Rompuy,
Prime Minister Elio Di Rupo,
President Inigo Mendez de Vigo,
Rector Jorg Monar,
Diplomatic Envoys,
Faculty Members,
Students,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
大家好！很高兴来到欧洲学院同大家见面。首先，我向学院的老师们、同学们，向各位关心和支持中国发展的欧洲朋友们，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！	
Good morning! It is a great pleasure for me to come to the College of Europe and meet with faculty members and students. First of all, my warm greetings and best wishes to you and all those in Europe who have shown interest in and support to the development of China.
在弗拉芒语中，布鲁日就是“桥”的意思。桥不仅方便了大家的生活，同时也是沟通、理解、友谊的象征。我这次欧洲之行，就是希望同欧洲朋友一道，在亚欧大陆架起一座友谊和合作之桥。	
In the Flemish language, Bruges means "bridge". A bridge not only makes life more convenient; it could also be a symbol of communication, understanding and friendship. I have come to Europe to build, together with our European friends, a bridge of friendship and cooperation across the Eurasian continent.
刚才，我和菲利普国王夫妇一起，参观了位于根特的沃尔沃汽车工厂。这家工厂是比利时最大的汽车生产企业，也是中国、比利时、瑞典三方经济技术合作的典范，在“中国投资”和“欧洲技术”之间架起了一座互利共赢的桥梁。	
Before coming here, I visited a Volvo plant in Ghent together with King Philippe and Queen Mathilde. Volvo Cars Ghent, the largest car manufacturer in Belgium, has become a model of economic and technological cooperation between China, Belgium and Sweden. It has actually set up a bridge linking Chinese investment with European technology. What it leads to is mutual benefit and win-win cooperation.
欧洲学院诞生于第二次世界大战结束之后，是人们反思战争、渴望和平的产物。人类历史总是伴随着战争魔咒。第二次世界大战的惨烈，促使欧洲人民痛定思痛，在让·莫内、罗伯特·舒曼等一批政治家领导下，开始联合自强，为实现持久和平与繁荣而奋斗。	
The College of Europe was created after the end of World War II as a result of people's reflection of the war and their yearning for peace. Human history has far too often been haunted by the specter of war. Having suffered from the calamity of World War II, people in Europe began to think over about their past misery and started to unite, under the leadership of statesmen like Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, in a joint pursuit for lasting peace and prosperity.
经过半个多世纪发展，欧洲学院不仅成为欧盟的重要智库，而且成为“欧洲政治精英的摇篮”。范龙佩先生说，欧洲学院“始终位于欧洲一体化的核心”，体现了“在战争废墟上诞生的欧洲信念”。	
After more than half a century of development, the College today not only serves as an important think tank for the European Union. It is also seen as the cradle of political elites of Europe. In the words of Mr. Van Rompuy, the College has always been "at the heart of European integration" and is in itself an expression of the faith in Europe born "out of the ruins of war".
老师们、同学们！	
Faculty Members,
Students,
就在欧洲学院成立的1949年，中华人民共和国成立了，中华民族的发展从此开启了新的历史纪元。1975年，周恩来总理和索姆斯爵士审时度势，作出了中欧建交的决定。现在，中欧建立了全面战略伙伴关系，在60多个领域建立了对话磋商机制；2013年双方贸易额达到5591亿美元，双方每年人员往来500多万人次，留学生总数近30万人。中欧关系已经成为世界上最具影响力的双边关系之一。
In 1949 when the College of Europe was established, the People's Republic of China was founded, heralding a new historical era in the development of the Chinese nation. Later in 1975, late Chinese premier Zhou Enlai and Sir Christopher Soames, acting on their assessment of the world situation then, decided that China and the European Economic Community should establish diplomatic relations. Today, China and the EU have a comprehensive strategic partnership. We have established dialogue and consultation mechanisms in over 60 areas. Our trade last year reached 559.1 billion US dollars. Over five million visits are exchanged each year. And about 300,000 of our students are studying overseas either in Europe or in China. The relationship between China and the EU has become one of the most important bilateral relationships in the world.
同时，我们也要看到，中欧关系发展空间还很大，潜力还远远没有发挥出来。为了把中欧关系推向前进，中方需要加深对欧洲的了解，欧方也需要加深对中国的了解。历史是现实的根源，任何一个国家的今天都来自昨天。只有了解一个国家从哪里来，才能弄懂这个国家今天怎么会是这样而不是那样，也才能搞清楚这个国家未来会往哪里去和不会往哪里去。	
Having said that, we should not forget that there is still greater room for the growth of China-EU relations and the potential is yet to be fully tapped. To move our relationship forward, China needs to know more about Europe, and Europe needs to know more about China. For any country in the world, the past always holds the key to the present and the present is always rooted in the past. Only when we know where a country has come from, could we possibly understand why the country is what it is today, and only then could we realize in which direction it is heading.
借此机会，我想给大家谈谈中国是一个什么样的国家，希望有助于大家观察中国、研究中国、认识中国。介绍中国是一个很大的课题，我选择中国几个最显著的特点来讲讲。	
So let me use this opportunity to describe to you what a country China is. I hope it will be helpful to you as you try to observe, understand and study China. Of course, a thorough account of the country would be too big a topic for today, so I will just focus on the following few features of China.
第一，中国是有着悠久文明的国家。在世界几大古代文明中，中华文明是没有中断、延续发展至今的文明，已经有5000多年历史了。我们的祖先在几千年前创造的文字至今仍在使用。2000多年前，中国就出现了诸子百家的盛况，老子、孔子、墨子等思想家上究天文、下穷地理，广泛探讨人与人、人与社会、人与自然关系的真谛，提出了博大精深的思想体系。他们提出的很多理念，如孝悌忠信、礼义廉耻、仁者爱人、与人为善、天人合一、道法自然、自强不息等，至今仍然深深影响着中国人的生活。中国人看待世界、看待社会、看待人生，有自己独特的价值体系。中国人独特而悠久的精神世界，让中国人具有很强的民族自信心，也培育了以爱国主义为核心的民族精神。	
First, China has a time-honored civilization. Of the world's ancient civilizations, the Chinese civilization has continued uninterrupted to this day. In fact, it has spanned over 5,000 years. The Chinese characters, invented by our ancestors several millennia ago, are still used today. Over 2,000 years ago, there was an era of great intellectual accomplishments in China, which is referred to as "the period of one hundred masters and schools of thought". Great thinkers such as Laozi, Confucius and Mozi, to name just a few, explored a wide range of topics from the universe to the Earth, and from man's relations with nature to relations amongst human beings and to that between the individual and society. The extensive and profound schools of thought they established covered many important ideas, such as the moral injunction of fidelity to one's parents and brothers and to the monarch and friends, the sense of propriety, justice, integrity and honor, the emphasis on benevolence and kindness towards fellow human beings and the belief that man should be in harmony with nature, follow nature's course and unremittingly pursue self-renewal. These values and teachings still carry a profound impact on Chinese people's way of life today, underpinning the unique value system in the Chinese outlook of the world, of society and of life itself. And this unique and time-honored intellectual legacy has instilled a strong sense of national confidence in the Chinese people and nurtured a national spirit with patriotism at the very core.
第二，中国是经历了深重苦难的国家。在工业革命发生前的几千年时间里，中国经济、科技、文化一直走在世界的第一方阵之中。近代以后，中国的封建统治者夜郎自大、闭关锁国，导致中国落后于时代发展步伐，中国逐步成为半殖民地半封建社会。外国列强入侵不断，中国社会动荡不已，人民生活极度贫困。穷则思变，乱则思定。中国人民经过逾百年前赴后继的不屈抗争，付出几千万人伤亡的巨大牺牲，终于掌握了自己的命运。中国人民对被侵略、被奴役的历史记忆犹新，尤其珍惜今天的生活。中国人民希望和平、反对战争，所以始终奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持不干涉别国内政、也不允许别人干涉中国内政。我们过去一直是这样做的，今后也会这样做下去。	
Second, China has gone through many vicissitudes. For several thousand years before the industrial revolution, China had been leading the world in economic, technological and cultural development. However, feudal rulers of the 18th and 19th centuries closed the door of China in boastful ignorance and China was since left behind in the trend of development. The country was subdued to a semi-colonial and semi-feudal society. As a result of incessant foreign invasions thereafter, China experienced great social turmoil and its people had to lead a life of extreme destitution. Poverty prompted the call for change and people experiencing turmoil aspired for stability. After a hundred years of persistent and unyielding struggle, the Chinese people, sacrificing tens of millions of lives, ultimately took their destiny back into their own hands. Nevertheless, the memory of foreign invasion and bullying has never been erased from the minds of the Chinese people, and that explains why we cherish so dearly the life we lead today. The Chinese people want peace; we do not want war. This is the reason why China follows an independent foreign policy of peace. China is committed to non-interference in other countries' internal affairs, and China will not allow others to interfere in its own affairs. This is the position we have upheld in the past. It is what we will continue to uphold in the future.
第三，中国是实行中国特色社会主义的国家。1911年，孙中山先生领导的辛亥革命，推翻了统治中国几千年的君主专制制度。旧的制度推翻了，中国向何处去？中国人苦苦寻找适合中国国情的道路。君主立宪制、复辟帝制、议会制、多党制、总统制都想过了、试过了，结果都行不通。最后，中国选择了社会主义道路。在建设社会主义实践中，我们有成功也有失误，甚至发生过严重曲折。改革开放以后，在邓小平先生领导下，我们从中国国情和时代要求出发，探索和开拓国家发展道路，形成了中国特色社会主义，提出要建设社会主义市场经济、民主政治、先进文化、和谐社会、生态文明，维护社会公平正义，促进人的全面发展，坚持和平发展，全面建成小康社会，进而实现现代化，逐步实现全体人民共同富裕。独特的文化传统，独特的历史命运，独特的国情，注定了中国必然走适合自己特点的发展道路。我们走出了这样一条道路，并且取得了成功。	
Third, China is a socialist country with Chinese characteristics. In 1911, the revolution led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen overthrew the autocratic monarchy that had ruled China for several thousand years. But once the old system was gone, where China would go became the question. The Chinese people then started exploring long and hard for a path that would suit China's national conditions. They experimented with constitutional monarchy, imperial restoration, parliamentarism, multi-party system and presidential government, yet nothing really worked. Finally, China took on the path of socialism. Admittedly, in the process of building socialism, we have had successful experience and also made mistakes. We have even suffered serious setbacks. After the "reform and opening-up" was launched under the leadership of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, we have, acting in line with China's national conditions and the trend of the times, explored and blazed a trail of development and established socialism with Chinese characteristics. Our aim is to build a socialist market economy, democracy, an advanced culture, a harmonious society and a sound eco-system, uphold social equity and justice, promote all-round development of the people, pursue peaceful development, complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and eventually achieve modernization and ensure prosperity for all. The uniqueness of China's cultural tradition, history and circumstances determines that China needs to follow a development path that suits its own reality. In fact, we have found such a path and achieved success along this path.
第四，中国是世界上最大的发展中国家。中国发展取得了历史性进步，经济总量已经跃升到世界第二位。作为有着13亿多人口的国家，中国用几十年的时间走完了发达国家几百年走过的发展历程，无疑是值得骄傲和自豪的。同时，我们也清醒认识到，中国经济总量虽大，但除以13亿多人口，人均国内生产总值还排在世界第八十位左右。中国城乡低保人口有7400多万人，每年城镇新增劳动力有1000多万人，几亿农村劳动力需要转移就业和落户城镇，还有8500多万残疾人。根据世界银行的标准，中国还有2亿多人口生活在贫困线以下，这差不多相当于法国、德国、英国人口的总和。今年春节前后的40天里，中国航空、铁路、公路承载了大约36亿人次的流动，相当于每天都有9000万人在流动之中。所以，让13亿多人都过上好日子，还需要付出长期的艰苦努力。中国目前的中心任务依然是经济建设，并在经济发展的基础上推动社会全面进步。	
Fourth, China is the world's biggest developing country. China has made historic progress in development. It is now the second largest economy in the world. It has achieved in several decades what took developed countries several centuries to achieve. This is, without doubt, a proud achievement for a country whose population exceeds 1.3 billion. In the meantime, we are clearly aware that the large size of the Chinese economy, when divided by 1.3 billion, sends China to around the 80th place in terms of per capita GDP. In China, over 74 million people rely on basic living allowances; each year, more than 10 million urban people would join the job market and several hundred million rural people need to be transferred to non-agricultural jobs and settle down in urban areas; more than 85 million people are with disabilities; and more than 200 million people are still living under the poverty line set by the World Bank, and that is roughly the population of France, Germany and the UK combined. In the 40-day-long season of the last Chinese New Year, China's airlines, railroads and highways transported 3.6 billion passengers, which means 90 million people were on the move each day. Therefore, to make the lives of the 1.3 billion Chinese people more comfortable requires still arduous efforts for years to come. Economic development remains the top priority for China, and we still need to work on that basis to achieve social progress in all areas.
第五，中国是正在发生深刻变革的国家。我们的先人早就提出了“天行健，君子以自强不息”的思想，强调要“苟日新，日日新，又日新”。在激烈的国际竞争中前行，就如同逆水行舟，不进则退。改革是由问题倒逼而产生，又在不断解决问题中而深化。我们强调，改革开放只有进行时、没有完成时。中国已经进入改革的深水区，需要解决的都是难啃的硬骨头，这个时候需要“明知山有虎，偏向虎山行”的勇气，不断把改革推向前进。我们推进改革的原则是胆子要大、步子要稳。“图难于其易，为大于其细。天下难事，必作于易；天下大事，必作于细。”随着中国改革不断推进，中国必将继续发生深刻变化。同时，我也相信，中国全面深化改革，不仅将为中国现代化建设提供强大推动力量，而且将为世界带来新的发展机遇。	
Fifth, China is a country undergoing profound changes. Our ancestors taught us that "as heaven maintains vigor through movement, a gentleman should constantly strive for self-perfection", and that "if one can make things better for one day, he should make them better every day". Being faced with fierce international competition is like sailing against the current. One either forges ahead or falls behind. Reform, which was first forced upon us by problems, goes deeper in addressing the problems. We know keenly that reform and opening-up is an ongoing process that will never stop. China's reform has entered a deep water zone, where problems crying to be resolved are all difficult ones. What we need is the courage to move the reform forward. To use a Chinese saying, we must "get ready to go into the mountain, being fully aware that there may be tigers to encounter". The principle we have laid down for reform is to act with courage while moving forward with steady steps. As we say in China, he who wants to accomplish a big and difficult undertaking should start with easier things first and make sure that all details are attended to. With the deepening of reform, China will continue to undergo profound changes. I believe that our efforts of deepening reform comprehensively will not only provide strong momentum for China's modernization drive, but also bring new development opportunities to the world.
总之，观察和认识中国，历史和现实都要看，物质和精神也都要看。中华民族5000多年文明史，中国人民近代以来170多年斗争史，中国共产党90多年奋斗史，中华人民共和国60多年发展史，改革开放30多年探索史，这些历史一脉相承，不可割裂。脱离了中国的历史，脱离了中国的文化，脱离了中国人的精神世界，脱离了当代中国的深刻变革，是难以正确认识中国的。	
To observe and understand China properly, one needs to bear in mind both China's past and present and draw reference from both China's accomplishments and the Chinese way of thinking. The 5,000-year-long Chinese civilization, the 170-year struggle by the Chinese people since modern times, the 90-year-plus journey of the Communist Party of China, the 60-year-plus development of the People's Republic and the 30-year-plus reform and opening-up should all be taken into account. They each make an integral part of China's history, and none should be taken out of the historical context. One can hardly understand China well without a proper understanding of China's history, culture, the Chinese people's way of thinking and the profound changes taking place in China today.
世界是多向度发展的，世界历史更不是单线式前进的。中国不能全盘照搬别国的政治制度和发展模式，否则的话不仅会水土不服，而且会带来灾难性后果。2000多年前中国人就认识到了这个道理：“橘生淮南则为橘，生于淮北则为枳，叶徒相似，其实味不同。所以然者何？水土异也。”	
The world's development is multi-dimensional, and its history is never a linear movement. China cannot copy the political system or development model of other countries, because it would not fit us and it might even lead to catastrophic consequences. The Chinese people, over 2,000 year ago, had come to understand this from a simple fact that the tasty orange, grown in southern China, would turn sour once it is grown in the north. The leaves may look the same, but the fruits taste quite different, because the north means different location and different climate.
有一个法国作家说，朋友看朋友是透明的，他们彼此交换生命。希望我的介绍能够让中国在你们眼前更透明一些。我也真诚希望，欧洲学院能够培养出大批了解中国、理解中国的人才，为中欧关系发展源源不断提供人才和智力支撑。	
A French writer once said that friends are transparent to friends because they exchange life. I hope what I just shared with you could draw for you a more transparent picture of China. I also sincerely hope that the College of Europe will produce a large number of talents who know and understand China well so as to provide a constant source of talent and intellectual support for the growth of China-Europe relations.
老师们、同学们！	
Faculty Members,
Students,
中国和欧洲虽然远隔万里，但都生活在同一个时间、同一个空间之内，生活息息相关。当前，中欧都处于发展的关键时期，都面临着前所未有的机遇和挑战。刚才，我说到我们希望同欧洲朋友一道，在亚欧大陆架起一座友谊和合作之桥。我们要共同努力建造和平、增长、改革、文明四座桥梁，建设更具全球影响力的中欧全面战略伙伴关系。	
China and Europe may seem far apart geographically, but we are in fact in the same time and the same space. I even feel that we are close to each other, as if in the same neighborhood. Both China and Europe are in a crucial stage of development and facing unprecedented opportunities and challenges. As I just said, we hope to work with our European friends to build a bridge of friendship and cooperation across the Eurasian continent. For that, we need to build four bridges for peace, growth, reform and progress of civilization, so that the China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership will take on even greater global significance.
——我们要建设和平稳定之桥，把中欧两大力量连接起来。中国和欧盟面积占世界十分之一，人口占世界四分之一，在联合国安理会拥有3个常任理事国席位。要和平不要战争、要多边不要单边、要对话不要对抗是双方的共识。我们要加强在全球性问题上的沟通和协调，为维护世界和平稳定发挥关键性作用。文明文化可以传播，和平发展也可以传播。中国愿意同欧盟一道，让和平的阳光驱走战争的阴霾，让繁荣的篝火温暖世界经济的春寒，促进全人类走上和平发展、合作共赢的道路。	
We need to build a bridge of peace and stability linking the two strong forces of China and the EU. China and the EU take up one tenth of the total area on Earth and one fourth of the world's population. Together, we take three permanent seats on the Security Council of the United Nations. We all need peace, multilateralism and dialogue, instead of war, unilateralism and confrontation. We need to enhance communication and coordination on global issues and play a key role in safeguarding world peace and stability. Civilization and culture can spread, so can peace and development. China stands ready to work with the EU to let the sunlight of peace drive away the shadow of war and the bonfire of prosperity warm up the global economy in the cold early spring, and enable the whole mankind to embark on the path of peaceful development and win-win cooperation.
——我们要建设增长繁荣之桥，把中欧两大市场连接起来。中国和欧盟经济总量占世界三分之一，是世界最重要的两大经济体。我们要共同坚持市场开放，加快投资协定谈判，积极探讨自由贸易区建设，努力实现到2020年双方贸易额达到10000亿美元的宏伟目标。我们还要积极探讨把中欧合作和丝绸之路经济带建设结合起来，以构建亚欧大市场为目标，让亚欧两大洲人员、企业、资金、技术活起来、火起来，使中国和欧盟成为世界经济增长的双引擎。	
We need to build a bridge of growth and prosperity linking the two big markets of China and the EU. China and the EU are the two most important major economies in the world with our combined economy accounting for one third of the global economy. We must uphold open market, speed up negotiations on the investment agreement, actively explore the possibility of a free trade area, and strive to achieve the ambitious goal of bringing two-way trade to one trillion US dollars by 2020. We should also study how to dovetail China-EU cooperation with the initiative of developing the Silk Road economic belt so as to integrate the markets of Asia and Europe, energize the people, businesses, capital and technologies of Asia and Europe, and make China and the EU the twin engines for global economic growth.
——我们要建设改革进步之桥，把中欧两大改革进程连接起来。中国和欧盟都在经历人类历史上前所未有的改革进程，都在走前人没有走过的路。双方要加强在宏观经济、公共政策、区域发展、农村发展、社会民生等领域对话和合作，尊重双方的改革道路，借鉴双方的改革经验，以自身改革带动世界发展进步。	
We need to build a bridge of reform and progress linking the reform processes in China and the EU. Both China and the EU are pursuing reforms that are unprecedented in human history, and both are sailing uncharted waters. We may enhance dialogue and cooperation on macro-economy, public policy, regional development, rural development, social welfare and other fields. We need to respect each other's path of reform and draw upon each other's reform experience. And we need to promote world development and progress through our reform efforts.
——我们要建设文明共荣之桥，把中欧两大文明连接起来。中国是东方文明的重要代表，欧洲则是西方文明的发祥地。正如中国人喜欢茶而比利时人喜爱啤酒一样，茶的含蓄内敛和酒的热烈奔放代表了品味生命、解读世界的两种不同方式。但是，茶和酒并不是不可兼容的，既可以酒逢知己千杯少，也可以品茶品味品人生。中国主张“和而不同”，而欧盟强调“多元一体”。中欧要共同努力，促进人类各种文明之花竞相绽放。	
We need to build a bridge of common cultural prosperity linking the two major civilizations of China and Europe. China represents in an important way the Eastern civilization, while Europe is the birthplace of the Western civilization. The Chinese people are fond of tea and the Belgians love beer. To me, the moderate tea drinker and the passionate beer lover represent two ways of understanding life and knowing the world, and I find them equally rewarding. When good friends get together, they may want to drink to their heart's content to show their friendship. They may also choose to sit down quietly and drink tea while chatting about their life. In China, we value the idea of preserving "harmony without uniformity", and here in the EU people stress the need to be "united in diversity". Let us work together for all flowers of human civilizations to blossom together.
无论国际风云如何变幻，中国始终支持欧洲一体化进程，始终支持一个团结、稳定、繁荣的欧盟在国际事务中发挥更大作用。中国即将发表第二份对欧盟政策文件，重申中国对欧盟和发展中欧关系的高度重视。去年，中欧共同制定了中欧合作2020战略规划，在近百个领域提出了一系列具有雄心的合作目标。双方应该一道努力，尽早把蓝图变为现实，让未来10年的中欧关系更加美好。	
In spite of changes in the international landscape, China has always supported European integration and a bigger role in international affairs by a united, stable and prosperous EU. China will soon release its second EU policy paper to reiterate the high importance it places on the EU and on its relations with the EU. Last year, China and the EU jointly formulated the Strategic Agenda 2020 for China-EU Cooperation, setting out a host of ambitious goals for China-EU cooperation in nearly 100 areas. The two sides should work in concert to turn the blueprint into reality at an early date and strive for greater progress in China-EU relations in the coming decade.
老师们、同学们！	
Faculty Members,
Students,
近年来，欧洲学院日益重视中国，开设了欧中关系课程，还积极筹建欧中研究中心，致力于欧中关系研究。中方决定同欧洲学院共建中国在欧盟国家的第一个“中国馆”，提供1万册介绍中国历史、文化等各领域发展情况的图书和影视片用于学术研究。	
The College of Europe has, in recent years, placed increasing importance on China. It has opened courses on Europe-China relations. It is also busy preparing for the launch of a Europe-China research center devoted to studies of Europe-China relations. China has decided to work with the College of Europe to build a "Chinese Library", the first of its kind in an EU member country, and will provide, for the purpose of academic research, 10,000 books, videos and films on Chinese history, culture and the achievements China has made in various fields.
“读万卷书”，还要“行万里路”。建议同学们多到中国去看看。耳闻是虚，眼观为实。中国愿同欧方一道努力，争取到2020年实现中欧学生年度双向交流达到30万人次。	
As we Chinese believe, one needs to not only read 10,000 books, but also travel 10,000 miles to know the world around us. I suggest that you go to China more often to see for yourselves what China is like. What you hear from others might be false, but what you see with your own eyes is real. China intends to work with the EU to bring the number of students exchanged between the two sides to 300,000 each year by 2020.
青年最富有朝气、最富有梦想。中国的未来属于年轻一代，欧洲的未来属于年轻一代，世界的未来属于年轻一代。希望中欧双方的同学们用平等、尊重、爱心来看待这个世界，用欣赏、包容、互鉴的态度来看待世界上的不同文明，促进中国和欧洲人民的相互了解和理解，促进中国、欧洲同世界其他国家人民的相互了解和理解，用青春的活力和青春的奋斗，让我们生活的这个星球变得更加美好。	
Young people are always energetic and full of dreams. They are the future of China, Europe and, indeed, of the world. I hope that Chinese and European students will perceive the world with equality, respect and love and treat different civilizations with appreciation, inclusiveness and the spirit of mutual learning. This way, you will promote mutual understanding and knowledge among the people of China, Europe and other parts of the world, and with your youthful energy and hard work, make our planet a better place to live in.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
129. 习近平在联合国教科文组织总部的演讲
尊敬的博科娃总干事，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellency Madame Irina Bokova, Director-General of UNESCO,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
大家好！有机会来到联合国教科文组织总部，感到十分高兴。首先，我谨对博科娃女士再次当选教科文组织总干事，表示衷心的祝贺！对教科文组织为推动人类文明交流互鉴作出的卓越贡献，表示诚挚的敬意！
Good morning. It gives me great pleasure to have an opportunity of visiting the UNESCO headquarters. Let me begin by offering Madame Bokova my heartfelt congratulations on her re-election as the Director-General of the Organization and paying my sincere tribute to UNESCO for the extraordinary contribution it has made for greater exchanges and mutual learning among human civilizations.
教科文组织诞生于69年前，那时世界反法西斯战争硝烟刚刚散去。面对战争给人类带来的惨烈后果，人类又一次反思战争与和平的真谛。千百年来，人类都梦想着持久和平，但战争始终像一个幽灵一样伴随着人类发展历程。此时此刻，世界上很多孩子正生活在战乱的惊恐之中。我们必须作出努力，让战争远离人类，让全世界的孩子们都在和平的阳光下幸福成长。
UNESCO was born 69 years ago when the smoke of the World War against Fascism had barely dissipated. The grisly horror of war forced mankind once again to reflect on the nature of war and peace. Throughout the centuries, people have yearned for lasting peace, but war, like a haunting ghost, has been accompanying the journey of human progress every step of the way. As we speak, many children on this planet are subjected to the horror of armed conflicts. We must do our utmost to keep war as far away as possible from mankind so that children across the world can grow up happily under the sunshine of peace.
在教科文组织总部大楼前的石碑上，用多种语言镌刻着这样一句话：“战争起源于人之思想，故务需于人之思想中筑起保卫和平之屏障。”
The stone wall at the entrance to the UNESCO headquarters carries the inscription of one single message in several languages: Since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defenses of peace must be constructed.
只要世界人民在心灵中坚定了和平理念、扬起了和平风帆，就能形成防止和反对战争的强大力量。人们希望通过文明交流、平等教育、普及科学，消除隔阂、偏见、仇视，播撒和平理念的种子。这就是教科文组织成立的初衷。
As long as the idea of peace can strike deep roots and the sail of peace can be hoisted in the hearts and minds of people all over the world, a strong defense will be constructed to prevent and stop war. People hoped to promote inter-civilization exchanges, equality of educational opportunities and scientific literacy in order to dispel estrangement, prejudice and hatred, and spread the seeds for the idea of peace. This is precisely why UNESCO was established in the first place.
这样一种期待，这样一种憧憬，是我们今天依然要坚守的。不仅要坚守，而且要通过跨国界、跨时空、跨文明的教育、科技、文化活动，让和平理念的种子在世界人民心中生根发芽，让我们共同生活的这个星球生长出一片又一片和平的森林。
The aspiration and vision as such deserve our renewed commitment. Not only so, but we must also step up cross-border, cross-time-and-space and cross-civilization activities in education, science, technology and culture to spread the seeds of the idea of peace far and wide so that they will sprout, take root and grow in the hearts and minds of the world's people, and provide the planet we share with more and more forests of peace.
自1945年成立以来，教科文组织忠实履行使命，在增进世界人民相互了解和信任、推动不同文明交流互鉴方面进行了不懈努力。中国高度重视同教科文组织的合作，愿意加大参与教科文组织的各项活动。为体现对非洲的支持和帮助，我们决定把通过教科文组织向包括非洲国家在内的发展中国家提供的长城奖学金名额由每年25人扩大为75人，我们还将同教科文组织一道把援助非洲信托基金的活动继续开展下去。
Since its inception in 1945, UNESCO has faithfully lived up to its mandate and worked untiringly to enhance trust and understanding among the world's peoples and promote exchanges and mutual learning among the various civilizations. China attaches great importance to its cooperation with UNESCO and stands ready to expand its participation in UNESCO activities. We have decided to expand the Great Wall Fellowship, a scheme that provides scholarship to developing countries, African countries included via UNESCO, from 25 to 75 people every year to demonstrate China's support and assistance for Africa. We will also continue to work within the framework of the UNESCO trust fund to help Africa.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Dear Friends,
文明因交流而多彩，文明因互鉴而丰富。文明交流互鉴，是推动人类文明进步和世界和平发展的重要动力。
Civilizations have become richer and more colorful with exchanges and mutual learning. Such exchanges and mutual learning form an important drive for human progress and global peace and development.
推动文明交流互鉴，需要秉持正确的态度和原则。我认为，最重要的是坚持以下几点。
To promote exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations, we must adopt a right approach with some important principles. They, in my view, contain the following:
第一，文明是多彩的，人类文明因多样才有交流互鉴的价值。阳光有七种颜色，世界也是多彩的。一个国家和民族的文明是一个国家和民族的集体记忆。人类在漫长的历史长河中，创造和发展了多姿多彩的文明。从茹毛饮血到田园农耕，从工业革命到信息社会，构成了波澜壮阔的文明图谱，书写了激荡人心的文明华章。
First, civilizations have come in different colors, and such diversity has made exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations relevant and valuable. Just as the sunlight has seven colors, our world is a place of dazzling colors. A civilization is the collective memory of a country or a nation. Throughout history, mankind have created and developed many colorful civilizations, from earlier days of primitive hunting to the period of agriculture, and from booming industrial revolution to the information society. Together, they present a magnificent genetic map of the exciting march of human civilizations.
“一花独放不是春，百花齐放春满园。”如果世界上只有一种花朵，就算这种花朵再美，那也是单调的。不论是中华文明，还是世界上存在的其他文明，都是人类文明创造的成果。
"A single flower does not make spring, while one hundred flowers in full blossom bring spring to the garden." If there were only one kind of flower in the world, people will find it boring no matter how beautiful it is. Be it the Chinese civilization, or other civilizations in the world, they are all fruits of human progress.
我参观过法国卢浮宫，也参观过中国故宫博物院，它们珍藏着千万件艺术珍品，吸引人们眼球的正是其展现的多样文明成果。文明交流互鉴不应该以独尊某一种文明或者贬损某一种文明为前提。中国人在2000多年前就认识到了“物之不齐，物之情也”的道理。推动文明交流互鉴，可以丰富人类文明的色彩，让各国人民享受更富内涵的精神生活、开创更有选择的未来。
I have visited the Louvre Museum in France and the Palace Museum in China, both of which house millions of pieces of art treasures. They are attractive because they are able to present the richness of diverse civilizations. Exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations must not be built on the exclusive praise or belittling of one particular civilization. As early as over 2,000 years ago, the Chinese people came to recognize that "it is only natural for things to be different". Greater exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations can further enrich the colors of various civilizations and the cultural life of people, and open up still greater alternatives in the future.
第二，文明是平等的，人类文明因平等才有交流互鉴的前提。各种人类文明在价值上是平等的，都各有千秋，也各有不足。世界上不存在十全十美的文明，也不存在一无是处的文明，文明没有高低、优劣之分。
Second, civilizations are equal, and such equality has made exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations possible. All human civilizations are equal in terms of value. They all have their respective strengths and shortcomings. There is no perfect civilization in the world. Nor is there a civilization that is devoid of any merit. No one civilization can be judged superior to another.
我访问过世界上许多地方，最喜欢做的一件事情就是了解五大洲的不同文明，了解这些文明与其他文明的不同之处、独到之处，了解在这些文明中生活的人们的世界观、人生观、价值观。我到过代表古玛雅文明的奇琴伊察，也到过带有浓厚伊斯兰文明色彩的中亚古城撒马尔罕。我深深感到，要了解各种文明的真谛，必须秉持平等、谦虚的态度。如果居高临下对待一种文明，不仅不能参透这种文明的奥妙，而且会与之格格不入。历史和现实都表明，傲慢和偏见是文明交流互鉴的最大障碍。
I have visited many places in the world. The best thing I wanted to do is to learn about differing civilizations across the five continents, what make them different and unique, how their people think about the world and life and what they hold dear. I have visited Chichen Itza, a window on the ancient Maya civilization, and the Central Asian city of Samarkand, an epitome of the ancient Islamic civilization. It is my keenly-felt conviction that an attitude of equality and modesty is required if one wants to truly understand the various civilizations. Taking a condescending attitude toward a civilization can not help anyone to appreciate its essence but may risk antagonizing it. Both history and reality show that pride and prejudice are two biggest obstacles to exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations.
第三，文明是包容的，人类文明因包容才有交流互鉴的动力。海纳百川，有容乃大。人类创造的各种文明都是劳动和智慧的结晶。每一种文明都是独特的。在文明问题上，生搬硬套、削足适履不仅是不可能的，而且是十分有害的。一切文明成果都值得尊重，一切文明成果都要珍惜。
Third, civilizations are inclusive, and such inclusiveness has given exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations the needed drive to move forward. The ocean is vast for it refuses no rivers. All civilizations are crystallizations of mankind's hard work and wisdom. Every civilization is unique. Copying other civilizations mechanically or blindly is like cutting one's toes just to fit his shoes, which is not only impossible but also highly detrimental. All achievements of civilizations deserve our respect and must be treasured.
历史告诉我们，只有交流互鉴，一种文明才能充满生命力。只要秉持包容精神，就不存在什么“文明冲突”，就可以实现文明和谐。这就是中国人常说的：“萝卜青菜，各有所爱。”
History also tells us that only by interacting with and learning from others can a civilization enjoy full vitality. If all civilizations can uphold inclusiveness, the so-called "clash of civilizations" will be out of the question and the harmony of civilizations will become reality. This is like what we Chinese often say, "radish or cabbage, each to his own delight."
中华文明经历了5000多年的历史变迁，但始终一脉相承，积淀着中华民族最深层的精神追求，代表着中华民族独特的精神标识，为中华民族生生不息、发展壮大提供了丰厚滋养。中华文明是在中国大地上产生的文明，也是同其他文明不断交流互鉴而形成的文明。
Having gone through over 5,000 years of vicissitudes, the Chinese civilization has always kept to its original root. Unique in representing China spiritually, it contains some most profound pursuits of the Chinese nation and provides it with abundant nourishment for existence and development. Though born on the soil of China, it has come to its present form through constant exchanges and mutual learning with other civilizations.
公元前100多年，中国就开始开辟通往西域的丝绸之路。汉代张骞于公元前138年和119年两次出使西域，向西域传播了中华文化，也引进了葡萄、苜蓿、石榴、胡麻、芝麻等西域文化成果。西汉时期，中国的船队就到达了印度和斯里兰卡，用中国的丝绸换取了琉璃、珍珠等物品。中国唐代是中国历史上对外交流的活跃期。据史料记载，唐代中国通使交好的国家多达70多个，那时候的首都长安里来自各国的使臣、商人、留学生云集成群。这个大交流促进了中华文化远播世界，也促进了各国文化和物产传入中国。15世纪初，中国明代著名航海家郑和七次远洋航海，到了东南亚很多国家，一直抵达非洲东海岸的肯尼亚，留下了中国同沿途各国人民友好交往的佳话。明末清初，中国人积极学习现代科技知识，欧洲的天文学、医学、数学、几何学、地理学知识纷纷传入中国，开阔中国人的知识视野。之后，中外文明交流互鉴更是频繁展开，这其中有冲突、矛盾、疑惑、拒绝，但更多是学习、消化、融合、创新。
In the 2nd century B.C., China began working on the Silk Road leading to the Western Regions. In 138 B.C. and 119 B.C., Envoy Zhang Qian of the Han Dynasty made two trips to those regions, spreading the Chinese culture there and bringing into China grape, alfalfa, pomegranate, flax, sesame and other products. In the Western Han Dynasty, China's merchant fleets sailed as far as India and Sri Lanka where they traded China's silk for colored glaze, pearls and other products. The Tang Dynasty saw dynamic interactions between China and other countries. According to historical documents, the dynasty exchanged envoys with over 70 countries, and Chang'an, the capital of Tang, bustled with envoys, merchants and students from other countries. Exchanges of such a magnitude helped the spread of the Chinese culture to the rest of the world and the introduction into China of the cultures and products from other countries. In the early 15th century, Zheng He, the famous navigator of China's Ming Dynasty, made seven expeditions to the Western Seas, reaching many Southeast Asian countries and even Kenya on the east coast of Africa. These trips left behind many stories of friendly exchanges between the people of China and countries along the route. In late Ming Dynasty and early Qing Dynasty, the Chinese people began to learn modern science and technology with great zeal, as the European knowledge of astronomy, medicine, mathematics, geometry and geography were being introduced into China, which helped broaden the horizon of the Chinese people. Thereafter, exchanges and mutual learning between the Chinese civilization and other civilizations became more frequent. There were indeed conflicts, frictions, bewilderment and denial in this process. But the more dominant features of the period were learning, digestion, integration and innovation.
佛教产生于古代印度，但传入中国后，经过长期演化，佛教同中国儒家文化和道家文化融合发展，最终形成了具有中国特色的佛教文化，给中国人的宗教信仰、哲学观念、文学艺术、礼仪习俗等留下了深刻影响。中国唐代玄奘西行取经，历尽磨难，体现的是中国人学习域外文化的坚韧精神。根据他的故事演绎的神话小说《西游记》，我想大家都知道。中国人根据中华文化发展了佛教思想，形成了独特的佛教理论，而且使佛教从中国传播到了日本、韩国、东南亚等地。
Buddhism originated in ancient India. After it was introduced into China, the religion went through an extended period of integrated development with the indigenous Confucianism and Taoism and finally became the Buddhism with Chinese characteristics, thus making a deep impact on the religious belief, philosophy, literature, art, etiquette and customs of the Chinese people. Xuanzang (Hiuen Tsang), the Tang monk who endured untold sufferings as he went on a pilgrimage to the west for Buddhist scriptures, gave full expression to the determination and fortitude of the Chinese people to learn from other cultures. I am sure that you have all heard about the Chinese classics Journey to the West, which was written on the basis of his stories. The Chinese people have enriched Buddhism and developed some special Buddhist thoughts in the light of Chinese culture, and helped it to spread from China to Japan, Korea, Southeast Asia and beyond.
2000多年来，佛教、伊斯兰教、基督教等先后传入中国，中国音乐、绘画、文学等也不断吸纳外来文明的优长。中国传统画法同西方油画融合创新，形成了独具魅力的中国写意油画，徐悲鸿等大师的作品受到广泛赞赏。中国的造纸术、火药、印刷术、指南针四大发明带动了世界变革，推动了欧洲文艺复兴。中国哲学、文学、医药、丝绸、瓷器、茶叶等传入西方，渗入西方民众日常生活之中。《马可·波罗游记》令无数人对中国心向往之。
In the course of some two thousand years and more, Buddhism, Islam and Christianity have been introduced into China successively, which allowed the country's music, painting and literature to benefit from the advantages of other civilizations. China's freehand oil painting is an innovative combination of China's traditional painting and the Western oil painting, and the works of Xu Beihong and other masters have been widely acclaimed. China's Four Great Inventions, namely, papermaking, gunpowder, movable-type printing and compass, led to changes in the world, including the European Renaissance. China's philosophy, literature, medicine, silk, porcelain and tea reached the West and became part of people's daily life. The Travels of Marco Polo generated a widespread interest in China.
大家都知道，中国有秦俑，人们称之为“地下的军团”。法国总统希拉克参观之后说：“不看金字塔，不算真正到过埃及。不看秦俑，不算真正到过中国。”1987年，这一尘封了2000多年的中华文化珍品被列入世界文化遗产。中国还有大量文明成果被教科文组织列入世界文化遗产、世界非物质文化遗产、世界记忆遗产名录。这里，我要对教科文组织为保存和传播中华文明作出的贡献，表示衷心的感谢！
Many people know about the terracotta warriors, "the buried legions of Emperor Qin". After his visit to the site, President Chirac of France said that a visit to Egypt will not be complete without seeing the pyramids, and that a visit to China will not be complete without seeing the terracotta warriors. In 1987, this national treasure of China, shrouded in secrecy for over two thousand years, was put on the UNESCO World Cultural Heritage list. There are many more proud Chinese achievements that have been included in the World Cultural Heritage list, the World Intangible Cultural Heritage list and the Memory of the World list. Here, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to UNESCO for its contribution to the preservation and dissemination of the Chinese civilization.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
当今世界，人类生活在不同文化、种族、肤色、宗教和不同社会制度所组成的世界里，各国人民形成了你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。
Today, we live in a world with different cultures, ethnic groups, skin colors, religions and social systems, and the people of various countries have become members of an intimate community of shared destiny.
中国人早就懂得了“和而不同”的道理。生活在2500年前的中国史学家左丘明在《左传》中记录了齐国上大夫晏子关于“和”的一段话：“和如羹焉，水、火、醯、醢、盐、梅，以烹鱼肉。”“声亦如味，一气，二体，三类，四物，五声，六律，七音，八风，九歌，以相成也。”“若以水济水，谁能食之？若琴瑟之专壹，谁能听之？”
The Chinese have long come to appreciate the wisdom of "harmony without uniformity". Zuo Qiuming, a Chinese historian who lived 2,500 years ago, recorded in the Chronicle of Zuo the following comments by Yan Ying, Prime Minister of the State of Qi during the Spring and Autumn Period: "Harmony is like cooking the thick soup. You need water, fire, vinegar, meat sauce, salt and plum to go with the fish or meat." "It is the same when it comes to music. Only by combining the texture, length, pace, mood, tone, pitch and style rightly and executing them properly can you produce an excellent melody." "Who can eat the soup with nothing but water in it? What ear can tolerate the same tone played repeatedly on one instrument?"
世界上有200多个国家和地区，2500多个民族和多种宗教。如果只有一种生活方式，只有一种语言，只有一种音乐，只有一种服饰，那是不可想象的。
There are 200-odd countries and regions, over 2,500 ethnic groups and a multitude of religions in the world today. We can hardly imagine if this world has only one lifestyle, one language, one kind of music and one style of costume.
雨果说，世界上最宽阔的是海洋，比海洋更宽阔的是天空，比天空更宽阔的是人的胸怀。对待不同文明，我们需要比天空更宽阔的胸怀。文明如水，润物无声。我们应该推动不同文明相互尊重、和谐共处，让文明交流互鉴成为增进各国人民友谊的桥梁、推动人类社会进步的动力、维护世界和平的纽带。我们应该从不同文明中寻求智慧、汲取营养，为人们提供精神支撑和心灵慰藉，携手解决人类共同面临的各种挑战。
Victor Hugo once said, "There is a prospect greater than the sea, and it is the sky; there is a prospect greater than the sky, and it is the human soul." Indeed, we need a mind that is broader than the sky as we approach different civilizations. Civilizations are like water, moistening everything silently. We should encourage different civilizations to respect each other and live in harmony, so that exchanges and mutual learning between civilizations will become a bridge promoting friendship between people around the world, an engine driving progress of human society, and a bond cementing world peace. We should draw wisdom and nourishment and seek spiritual support and psychological consolation from various civilizations, and work together to tackle the challenges facing mankind.
1987年，在中国陕西的法门寺，地宫中出土了20件美轮美奂的琉璃器，这是唐代传入中国的东罗马和伊斯兰的琉璃器。我在欣赏这些域外文物时，一直在思考一个问题，就是对待不同文明，不能只满足于欣赏它们产生的精美物件，更应该去领略其中包含的人文精神；不能只满足于领略它们对以往人们生活的艺术表现，更应该让其中蕴藏的精神鲜活起来。
In 1987, 20 exquisite pieces of colored glaze were excavated at the underground chamber of Famen Temple in Shaanxi, China. These East Roman and Islamic relics were brought into China during the Tang Dynasty. Marveling at these exotic relics, I thought hard and concluded that as we approach the world's different civilizations, we should not limit ourselves to just admiring the exquisiteness of the objects involved. Rather, we should try to learn and appreciate the cultural significance behind them. Instead of only satisfying ourselves with their artistic presentation of people's life in the past, we should do our best to breathe new life into their inherent spirit.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
拿破仑曾经说过，世上有两种力量：利剑和思想；从长而论，利剑总是败在思想手下。我们要积极发展教育事业，通过普及教育，启迪心智，传承知识，陶冶情操，使人们在持续的格物致知中更好认识各种文明的价值，让教育为文明传承和创造服务。我们要大力发展科技事业，通过科技进步和创新，认识自我，认识世界，改造社会，使人们在持续的天工开物中更好掌握科技知识和技能，让科技为人类造福。我们要大力推动文化事业发展，通过文化交流，沟通心灵，开阔眼界，增进共识，让人们在持续的以文化人中提升素养，让文化为人类进步助力。
Napoleon Bonaparte once said, "There are only two forces in the world, the sword and the spirit. In the long run the sword will always be conquered by the spirit." We should develop education more actively. Education can open people's mind, impart knowledge, and cultivate temperament. The continued process of learning will enable our people to better appreciate the value of different civilizations. In this sense, education is an effective vehicle for the continuation and creation of civilizations. We should develop science and technology more vigorously. Scientific advancement and innovation can help people understand themselves and the world and be in a stronger position to change their society for the better. The continued process of exploiting nature will enable our people to master still more knowledge and skills. In this sense, science and technology are a powerful tool to make the world a better place for mankind. We should promote cultural undertakings more energetically. Cultural exchanges can help open our hearts to each other, broaden our horizon and build greater consensus among us. The continued process of cultivating people morally and intellectually will result in a higher standard of humanity. In this sense, culture is a big booster for human progress.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
中国人民正在为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦，就是要实现国家富强、民族振兴、人民幸福，既深深体现了今天中国人的理想，也深深反映了中国人自古以来不懈追求进步的光荣传统。
The Chinese people are striving to fulfill the Chinese dream of the great renewal of the Chinese nation. The Chinese dream of the great renewal of the Chinese nation is about prosperity of the country, rejuvenation of the nation, and happiness of the people. It reflects the ideal of the Chinese people of today as well as the fine tradition of relentlessly seeking progress that we have had since ancient times.
实现中国梦，是物质文明和精神文明均衡发展、相互促进的结果。没有文明的继承和发展，没有文化的弘扬和繁荣，就没有中国梦的实现。中华民族的先人们早就向往人们的物质生活充实无忧、道德境界充分升华的大同世界。中华文明历来把人的精神生活纳入人生和社会理想之中。所以，实现中国梦，是物质文明和精神文明比翼双飞的发展过程。随着中国经济社会不断发展，中华文明也必将顺应时代发展焕发出更加蓬勃的生命力。
The Chinese dream requires balanced development and mutual reinforcement of material and cultural progress. Without the continuation and development of civilization or the promotion and prosperity of culture, the Chinese dream will not come true. Forefathers of the Chinese nation long yearned for a world of great harmony in which people are free from want and follow a high moral standard. In the Chinese civilization, people's cultural pursuit has always been part of their life and social ideals. So the realization of the Chinese dream is a process of both material and cultural development. As China continues to make economic and social progress, the Chinese civilization will keep pace with the times and acquire greater vitality.
每一种文明都延续着一个国家和民族的精神血脉，既需要薪火相传、代代守护，更需要与时俱进、勇于创新。中国人民在实现中国梦的进程中，将按照时代的新进步，推动中华文明创造性转化和创新性发展，激活其生命力，把跨越时空、超越国度、富有永恒魅力、具有当代价值的文化精神弘扬起来，让收藏在博物馆里的文物、陈列在广阔大地上的遗产、书写在古籍里的文字都活起来，让中华文明同世界各国人民创造的丰富多彩的文明一道，为人类提供正确的精神指引和强大的精神动力。
A civilization carries on its back the soul of a country or nation. It needs to be passed on from one generation to the next. Yet more importantly, it needs to keep pace with the times and innovate with courage. As we pursue the Chinese dream, the Chinese people will encourage creative shifts and innovative development of the Chinese civilization in keeping with the progress of the times. We need to inject new vitality into the Chinese civilization by energizing all cultural elements that transcend time, space and national borders and that possess both perpetual appeal and current value, and we need to bring all collections in our museums, all heritage structures across our lands and all records in our classics to life. In this way, the Chinese civilization, together with the rich and colorful civilizations created by the people of other countries, will provide mankind with the right cultural guidance and strong motivation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
“等闲识得东风面，万紫千红总是春。”明年是教科文组织成立70周年，我相信，在博科娃总干事领导下，教科文组织一定能为推动人类文明交流互鉴、促进世界和平谱写新的篇章。
谢谢大家。
As an old Chinese poem goes, "When I glance at the visage of vernal breeze, I know that a thousand flowers of purple and red set spring aglow." UNESCO will mark its 70th anniversary next year. I am confident that under the stewardship of Director-General Bokova, the organization will make still more achievements in its efforts to promote exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations and advance the cause of peace in the world.
Thank you.
124. 习近平在蒙古国国家大呼拉尔的演讲
守望相助，共创中蒙关系发展新时代
——在蒙古国国家大呼拉尔的演讲
（2014年8月22日，乌兰巴托）
中华人民共和国主席习近平
Open up New Horizons for China-Mongolia Relations Through Mutual Assistance
Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the State Great Khural of Mongolia
Ulan Bator, August 22, 2014
尊敬的额勒贝格道尔吉总统及夫人，
尊敬的恩赫包勒德主席，
尊敬的阿勒坦呼亚格总理，
各位议员，各位部长，各位嘉宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency President Elbegdorj and Mrs. Elbegdorj,
Your Excellency Chairman Enkhbold,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Altankhuyag,
Distinguished Members of the State Great Khural,
Ministers,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
大家好！今天，有机会来到蒙古国国家大呼拉尔，同各位朋友们见面，我感到十分高兴。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，向在座各位，并通过你们向全体蒙古国人民，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！	
Good Morning! It is a great pleasure to meet you here at the State Great Khural of Mongolia. At the outset, please allow me to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, sincere greetings and best wishes to all of you and, through you, to the entire people of Mongolia!
2008年，我担任国家副主席时首次出访就选择了蒙古国。踏上这块美丽的土地，我深深感到这里是物华天宝的好地方。贵国著名文学家那楚克道尔吉在他的诗作《我的故乡》中曾写到：“肯特、杭爱、萨彦岭的巍峨群山，是点缀北国的层峦叠嶂；漠南、沙尔克、诺敏的无边戈壁，是横亘南疆的沙漠瀚海。这就是我生长的地方，美丽的蒙古大地！”	
Mongolia was the first country I visited as Vice President of China in 2008. As soon as I set foot on the beautiful land of Mongolia, I was deeply impressed by its naturally endowed abundance. Natsagdorj, a well-known Mongolian writer, depicted a poetic and beautiful scene of Mongolia in his poem My Native Land: High stately mountains of Khentei, Khangai and Soyon; Forests and thick-wooded ridges-the beauty of the North; The Great Gobi desert-the spaces of Menen, Sharga and Nomin; And the oceans of sand deserts that dominate the South; This, this is my native land, The lovely country-my Mongolia.
时隔6年，我再次来到蒙古国，看到这里是一片欣欣向荣的景象，充满生机活力，感到由衷的高兴，我对勤劳勇敢的蒙古国人民取得的发展成就，表示衷心的祝贺！	
Six years later, I am here again. What I see is a thriving country dynamic and full of vitality. With heartfelt joy, I wish to extend our sincere congratulation to you, the brave and hardworking people of Mongolia, on your achievements.
昨天，我同额勒贝格道尔吉总统举行了会谈，刚才又分别会见了恩赫包勒德主席、阿勒坦呼亚格总理。我同蒙古国领导人就中蒙关系和共同关心的问题深入交换意见，达成广泛共识。双方一致决定，将中蒙关系提升为全面战略伙伴关系并发表联合宣言，还签署了涉及政治、经贸、人文等各个领域的20多项合作文件。我对这次访问的成果感到满意，对中蒙关系更加充满信心。	
Yesterday, I had talks with President Elbegdorj. Before I came here, I met with both Chairman Enkhbold and Prime Minister Altankhuyag. Mongolian leaders and I have had an in-depth exchange of views on our bilateral ties as well as issues of shared interest. We have reached broad consensus. The two sides have agreed to elevate China-Mongolia relations to a comprehensive strategic partnership and issue a joint statement. We have signed more than 20 cooperation documents covering political, economic, trade and cultural fields. I am happy with the outcomes of my visit. And I have greater confidence in the relations between China and Mongolia.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
“路遥知马力，日久见人心。”65年前，中蒙正式建立外交关系。蒙古国是最早承认新中国的国家之一。我们不会忘记贵国对新中国给予的支持。我愿再次重申：无论国际和地区形势如何变化，中国都将始终按照中蒙友好合作关系条约精神，尊重蒙古国独立、主权、领土完整，尊重蒙古国人民自主选择的发展道路。这是我们将长期坚持的一项基本政策。
Just as distance tests a horse's strength, time will reveal a person's sincerity. China and Mongolia officially established diplomatic relations 65 years ago. Mongolia was one of the first countries to recognize New China and we will always remember the support you have rendered us. Let me reiterate that no matter how the international and regional situation may evolve, China will always follow the spirit enshrined in the the friendship and cooperation treaty between China and Mongolia, respect Mongolia's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity and the Mongolian people's independent choice of development path. This is a basic and long-term policy that we will uphold. Sixty years are a cycle according to the Chinese zodiac.
我们高兴地看到，进入第二个甲子的中蒙关系正朝着更高水平不断发展。特别是过去20年间，中蒙高层交往频繁，政治互信不断加深。两国经贸务实合作快速发展，中国连续多年保持贵国最大贸易伙伴国和最大投资来源国地位。2013年，中蒙人员往来130多万人次，其中蒙古国公民赴华超过100万人次。应该说，中蒙全面战略伙伴关系的建立恰逢其时、水到渠成，标志着中蒙关系进入历史最好的发展时期。	
We are pleased to see that China-Mongolia ties, now in their second cycle, are moving further ahead. The past two decades, in particular, have witnessed frequent exchange of high-level visits and increased political mutual trust. Practical business ties have grown fast. China has, for many years in a row, remained Mongolia's largest trading partner and source of investment. In the year 2013 alone, more than 1.3 million visits were made between China and Mongolia, with more than 1 million from Mongolia to China. No doubt, the establishment of China-Mongolia comprehensive strategic partnership, a natural development at a most opportune time, has ushered the bilateral ties into the best development period in history.
中蒙是山水相连的友好邻邦，同为本地区重要国家。今年是中蒙建交65周年、中蒙友好合作关系条约修订20周年和中蒙友好交流年，双方应该以建立全面战略伙伴关系为契机，推动中蒙关系不断迈上更高台阶。	
China and Mongolia are friendly neighbours sharing common mountains and rivers and both are important countries in the region. This year marks the 65th anniversary of China-Mongolia diplomatic ties, 20th anniversary of the amendment to the friendship and cooperation treaty between the two countries, and the year of China-Mongolia friendship and exchanges. The two sides should take the advantage of the establishment of our comprehensive strategic partnership and work together to bring China-Mongolia ties to an even higher level.
第一，中蒙要做守望相助的好邻居。不论国际风云如何变幻，双方都要牢牢把握两国关系大方向，站在战略伙伴的角度多为对方着想，在涉及彼此主权、安全、领土完整等重大核心利益和重大关切问题上相互予以坚定支持。	
First, China and Mongolia should be good neighbors that support each other. Whatever changes may take place in the international landscape, our two countries should always keep in mind the overall interests of the bilateral relations. We should think more for each other from the perspective of strategic partners and firmly support each other on issues involving our respective core interests or major concerns, such as sovereignty, security and territorial integrity.
两国要保持高层交往势头，两国领导人可以通过各种渠道保持经常性会晤，加强战略沟通，深化政治互信。我邀请额勒贝格道尔吉总统今年11月赴华出席亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议期间举行的互联互通伙伴对话会，中方欢迎恩赫包勒德主席今年赴华进行正式访问。双方已经决定建立中蒙立法机关定期交流机制和中蒙外交部门战略对话机制，双方将在防务安全磋商框架内，继续加强两国国防合作。	
Our two countries should maintain the momentum of exchanging high-level visits. It is beneficial for leaders of the two countries to keep regular contacts through various channels so as to enhance strategic communication and political mutual trust. I would like to invite President Elbegdorj to a dialogue meeting on connectivity to be held during the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in China in the coming November. China looks forward to Chairman Enkhbold's official visit to China this year. Our two countries have agreed to put in place a regular exchange mechanism between our legislatures and a strategic dialogue program between the two foreign ministries, and enhance our cooperation in national defense within the framework of defense security consultation.
中方支持蒙方加入亚太经合组织，支持蒙方积极参与东亚合作，支持蒙方以适当方式参与东亚峰会和中日韩合作，支持蒙方提出的东北亚安全乌兰巴托对话倡议，愿在联合国、亚欧会议、亚信会议、上海合作组织等框架内同蒙方加强合作。	
China supports Mongolia in joining the APEC and actively participating in East Asia cooperation. We support Mongolia in engaging in the East Asia Summit and China-Japan-ROK cooperation in an appropriate manner and Mongolia's initiative of Ulaanbaatar Dialogue on Northeast Asian Security. We are ready for closer cooperation with Mongolia in the United Nations, Asia-Europe Meeting, Conference on Interactions and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
中方愿同蒙方加强在丝绸之路经济带倡议下合作，对蒙方提出的草原之路倡议持积极和开放态度。双方可以在亚洲基础设施投资银行等新的平台上加强合作，共同发展，共同受益。	
China is also ready to increase cooperation with Mongolia in matters covered by the Silk Road Economic Belt project. China is positive and open to Mongolia's initiative for passage to grassland. Our two countries may step up cooperation for common development and mutual benefit through new platforms such as the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
第二，中蒙要做互利共赢的好伙伴。“近水楼台先得月。”中蒙地理相邻、经济互补，中方的市场、资金、技术、通道和蒙方的资源富集优势互补性很强，有许多合作机遇。去年，中国商品进出口总额达到4.16万亿美元。未来5年，中国预计将进口超过10万亿美元商品，对外投资规模预计超过5000亿美元。去年，中国公民出境旅游近1亿人次，估计到2020年这一数字将超过每年1.5亿人次。中国持续发展将为包括蒙古国在内的合作伙伴带来巨大市场和机遇。	
Second, China and Mongolia should become good partners in win-win cooperation. Just as we say in China "one gets a better view of the rising moon at a waterfront pavilion or a favorable position", the geographical proximity and economic complementarity between our two countries - China's market, capital, technology and transportation corridors and Mongolia's rich natural endowment, promise great opportunities for closer cooperation between us. Last year, China's imports and exports totaled US$4.16 trillion. For the coming five years, China will import over US$10 trillion of goods and make outbound investment worth over US$500 billion. Last year, about 100 million Chinese tourists travelled abroad, and the number is estimated to top 150 million annually by 2020. Sustained development in China will offer Mongolia and other cooperation partners a big market and enormous opportunities.
我这次访问期间，蒙方长期关心的过境运输、出海口等问题都得到了妥善解决。双方成立了矿能和互联互通合作委员会，签署了《中蒙经贸合作中期发展纲要》，确定了到2020年双边贸易额达到100亿美元的目标。双方就加强口岸、铁路合作等进行了深入探讨，达成了共识。双方决定将双边本币互换规模扩大至150亿元人民币，双方同意研究在中国二连浩特－蒙古国扎门乌德等地建立跨境经济合作区。双方还将在矿产品深加工、新能源、电力、农牧业、环保等领域开展全方位合作。这些新的合作必将增进两国人民福祉，给两国人民带来实实在在的利益。	
During my current visit, the issues of transit transport and sea access that Mongolia had long sought to solve have been properly resolved. Our two countries have established a cooperation committee on minerals, energy and connectivity, and signed an Outline for Midterm Development of China-Mongolia Economic Cooperation, whose goal is to increase the two-way trade to US$10 billion by 2020. We have had an in-depth discussion and reached consensus on port and railway cooperation. We have decided to expand bilateral currency swap to RMB15 billion and agreed to study the possibility of establishing a cross-border economic cooperation zone spanning China's Erenhot and Mongolia's Zamyn-Uud. We will conduct full cooperation in the deep-processing of minerals and development of new energy, electricity, agriculture and animal husbandry, environmental protection and other areas. These new cooperation programs will surely deliver real benefits to our two peoples and enhance their well-being.
第三，中蒙要做常来常往的好朋友。路熟了走起来容易，人熟了聊起来容易。昨天，我同额勒贝格道尔吉总统会谈时，双方商定将进一步活跃人员往来，相互给予更加便利的签证政策，继续加强青年、媒体等领域机制性交流，营造更加有利的社会氛围，大力宣传中蒙友好。	
Third, China and Mongolia should be good friends who will visit each other frequently. Travel is easy on familiar roads, and conversation is easy between friends. In my talks with President Elbegdorj yesterday, we agreed to encourage more people-to-people exchanges through greater visa facilitations, and increase exchanges between the youth, media and other sectors of the two countries so as to create a more favorable social environment and foster a culture of China-Mongolia friendship.
中方欢迎更多蒙方公民赴华留学、旅游、经商、就医。今后5年内，中方将向蒙方提供1000个培训名额，增加提供1000个中国政府全额奖学金名额，为蒙军培训500名留学生，邀请500名蒙方青年访华，邀请250名蒙方记者访华，并向蒙方免费提供25部中国优秀影视剧译作。相信这将对增进两国人民的相互了解和友好感情发挥重要促进作用。	
China welcomes more Mongolian citizens to China for purposes of study, travel, business or medical treatment. In the coming five years, China will offer training opportunities for 1,000 Mongolians, provide an extra 1,000 full government scholarships to Mongolia, and train 500 Mongolian officers and soldiers. We will invite 500 Mongolian youth and 250 Mongolian journalists to China and offer free of charge 25 popular Chinese movies and TV plays that have been translated into Mongolian language. I believe all these will help boost the mutual understanding and friendship between our peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
当前，中国人民正在致力于实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标，努力到2020年全面建成小康社会，到本世纪中叶建成富强民主文明和谐的社会主义现代化国家。我们形象地把这个目标概括为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。同时，蒙古国人民也正致力于国家改革和经济社会发展，可以说蒙古国人民心中也有一个蒙古梦。中国进行改革开放和现代化建设，将辐射和带动包括蒙古国在内的周边国家，中蒙双方发展战略完全可以进行有效对接，促进共同发展，实现共同繁荣。同时，我们也十分清楚，实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标，对中国这样一个拥有13亿多人口、发展还不平衡的国家来说并非易事，可以说任重而道远，需要继续长期艰苦奋斗。实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标，必须有一个良好周边环境。家门口太平，我们才能安心、踏实办好自己的事情。随着中国不断发展起来，世界上有一些人对中国走向产生疑虑，担心中国发展强大后构成威胁。这要么是一种误解，要么就是一种曲解。	
At present, the Chinese people are working towards the "two centennial goals", which is to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by 2020 and build China into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious by the middle of the century. These two goals together make up the Chinese dream of the great renewal of the Chinese nation. At the same time, the people of Mongolia are also committing themselves to advancing reform and achieving economic and social development. In other words, there is also a Mongolian dream in the hearts of the Mongolian people. China's ongoing reform, opening-up and modernization process will provide catalyst and impetus for the growth of Mongolia and other neighboring countries. This makes it possible for us to effectively align our respective development strategies for the benefit of common development and prosperity. On the other hand, we are soberly aware that it is not easy to realize the "two centennial goals" in China, a country with a population of over 1.3 billion and uneven development. It is going to be a long and arduous process that requires a long-term commitment. In the meantime, to realize these two goals, we need a sound neighboring environment. Without a peaceful neighborhood, we will not be able to keep our mind on our goals and manage our own affairs well. As China grows, some people in the world have begun to doubt how China would go about. They are worried that a stronger China might become a threat to them. This is either a misunderstanding or a misinterpretation of China's intention.
中国多次公开声明，中国将坚定不移走和平发展道路，同时也将推动各国共同坚持和平发展。中国将积极承担更多国际责任，同世界各国一道维护人类良知和国际公理，在世界和地区事务中主持公道、伸张正义。中国将继续以最大诚意和耐心，坚持通过对话协商以和平方式解决分歧和争端。	
China has publicly stated on numerous occasions that it will stick to the path of peaceful development and encourage all countries to pursue peaceful development. China will take up more international responsibilities, work with other countries to uphold human conscience and international justice, and stand for justice in regional and international affairs. China will continue to handle differences and disputes peacefully through dialogues and consultations with utmost sincerity and patience.
中国也多次公开声明，中国尊重各国人民自主选择发展道路的权利，绝不把自己的意志强加于人，也绝不允许任何人把他们的意志强加于中国人民。我们主张以和平方式解决国际争端，反对各种形式的霸权主义和强权政治，永远不称霸，永远不搞扩张。	
China has also publicly stated on numerous occasions that it respects the right of people of all countries to independently choose their path of development, and that it will never impose its will on others, nor will it allow others to impose their will on the Chinese people. China stands for peaceful solutions to international disputes, opposes hegemonism and power politics in all forms, and will never seek hegemony or expansion.
中华民族历来是爱好和平的民族，中华文化崇尚和谐。在5000多年的文明发展中，中华民族一直追求和传承着和平、和睦、和谐的坚定理念。以和为贵，与人为善，己所不欲、勿施于人等观念和传统在中国代代相传，深深植根于中国人的精神中，深深体现在中国人的行为上。自古以来，中华民族就积极开展对外交往通商，而不是对外侵略扩张；执着于保家卫国的爱国主义，而不是开疆拓土的殖民主义。中国近代史，是一部充满灾难的悲惨屈辱史，是一部中华民族抵抗外来侵略、实现民族独立的伟大斗争史。历经苦难的中国人民珍惜和平，绝不会将自己曾经遭受过的悲惨经历强加给其他民族。中国人民愿意同世界各国人民和睦相处、和谐发展，共谋和平、共护和平、共享和平。	
The Chinese nation is a peace-loving nation, and the Chinese culture values harmony. For over 5,000 years of its civilization, the Chinese nation has unswervingly advocated and promoted the ideas of peace, amity and harmony. For generations, the Chinese people have strongly believed in the traditional ideas that peace is the most precious, that one should be friendly to others and that one should not do onto others what he does not want others do unto him. All these ideas have taken deep root in the heart of the Chinese people and shaped their character and behavior. Since ancient times, the Chinese nation has actively engaged itself in exchanges and trade with foreign countries, instead of external aggression or expansion. We have committed ourselves to the patriotic cause of defending our homeland, instead of colonialist pursuit of territorial expansion. The modern history of China is a humiliating and tragic record of miserable sufferings, and at the same time, it also captures the epic struggle of the Chinese people to resist foreign aggression and realize national independence. Emerging from untold suffering, the Chinese people cherish the value of peace, and will never want to see other nations go through the same pains it endured in the past. The Chinese people want, more than anything else, to live in peace and harmony with the people of other countries, and work with them to promote, defend and share peace together.
中国改革开放30多年的历史已经证明，和平发展是中国基于自身国情、社会制度、文化传统作出的战略抉择，顺应时代潮流，符合中国根本利益，符合周边国家利益，符合世界各国利益，我们没有理由去改变它。	
The experience of China's reform and opening-up over the past 30 years and more has proved that peaceful development is a strategic choice that suits China's own national conditions, social system and cultural traditions. It conforms to the trend of the times, and serves the fundamental interests of China. It also meets the interests of China's neighboring countries and those of all countries in the world. So there is no reason whatsoever to change this policy.
中国始终把包括蒙古国在内的周边邻国视作促进共同发展的合作伙伴、维护和平稳定的真诚朋友，同绝大多数邻国建立了不同形式的伙伴关系。我们将继续坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴的方针，坚持睦邻、安邻、富邻的政策，在同邻国相处时秉持亲、诚、惠、容的理念。
China has always regarded Mongolia and other neighboring countries as partners for pursuing common development and sincere friends for maintaining peace and stability. We have established partnerships with most of our neighbors in one form or another. We will continue the policy of enhancing good-neighborliness and partnership with neighbors, remain committed to living in harmony and security with neighbors for common prosperity, and uphold the principles of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness in our relations with neighbors.
“众人拾柴火焰高。”中国愿意为包括蒙古国在内的周边国家提供共同发展的机遇和空间，欢迎大家搭乘中国发展的列车，搭快车也好，搭便车也好，我们都欢迎，正所谓“独行快，众行远”。我多次讲，中国开展对发展中国家的合作，将坚持正确义利观，不搞我赢你输、我多你少，在一些具体项目上将照顾对方利益。中国人讲求言必信、行必果。中国说到的话、承诺的事，一定会做到、一定会兑现。	
"Many hands make light work." China wishes to provide Mongolia and other neighboring countries with both opportunities and space for common development. All countries are welcome to get on board the express train of China's development. As a saying goes, "If you want to go fast, go alone; if you want to go far, go together." I have said many times that in our cooperation with other developing countries, China will set store by upholding moral principles while pursuing its interests. China will not subscribe to the zero-sum approach. When it comes to specific projects, China will give more consideration to the interests of our cooperation partners. We Chinese people attach great importance to taking action to keep promises. We will do whatever it takes to honor our commitment.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
蒙古国有“邻里心灵相通，命运与共”的谚语。中国人讲“好邻居金不换。”中国是世界上邻国最多的国家，我们把这当作宝贵财富。	
As a Mongolian saying goes, "Neighbors are connected at heart and share a common destiny." In the same vein, we often say in China, "Good neighbors are more precious than gold." China has more neighbors than any other country in the world. And this we take as a precious gift.
当今世界，亚洲是经济发展最具活力的地区，同时也是热点敏感问题较多的地区，亚洲国家如何正确处理同邻国关系，实现邻国和睦相处、共同发展，妥善解决彼此争议和矛盾，是一个重大课题。我认为，要破解这一课题，关键在于要顺应时代潮流和民心所向，坚持相互尊重、求同存异、面向未来、合作共赢的原则，更多用东方智慧来解决问题、化解矛盾、促进和谐。	
Although, in the world today, Asia is the most dynamic region for economic development, it is also a region with more hotspot and sensitive issues than other regions. How to properly manage relations with neighbors, live in harmony with each other for common development, and properly handle disputes and differences remains a major issue for Asian countries. I believe that to find a solution, it is essential to follow the trend of the times and the will of the people. We should uphold the principle of mutual respect, seek common ground while reserving differences, adopt a forward-looking approach and seek win-win cooperation. Above all, we should rely more on our oriental wisdom to solve problems, diffuse tension and advance harmony.
60年前，中国、印度、缅甸共同倡导和平共处五项原则，成为指导国与国关系的基本准则，是亚洲国家为促进国际关系发展作出的重要贡献。在推进区域合作进程中，亚洲国家交流互鉴，坚持相互尊重、协商一致、照顾各方舒适度的亚洲方式，这是符合本地区特点的处理相互关系的传统。这个传统体现着亚洲的邻国相处之道，在今天应该继续发扬光大，为亚洲国家以及整个地区和平、发展、合作激发出源源不断的内生动力。坚持和实践这一传统，要做到以下几点。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, jointly initiated by China, India and Myanmar sixty years ago, have become basic norms governing state-to-state relations and thus represent an important contribution that Asian countries have made to the development of international relations. While moving forward with regional cooperation, Asian countries have embraced the Asian approach that features learning from each other through exchanges, mutual respect, consensus-building, and accommodating each other's comfort level. This approach to state-to-state relations fits in well with the specific conditions in Asia. Embodying the Asian tradition of handling relations with neighbors, this approach should be carried forward in order to unleash the endless inherent strength for peace, development and cooperation in Asian countries and the region as a whole. To uphold and practice this approach, we need to do the following:
——互尊互信。历史上，许多亚洲国家饱受外来欺凌之苦，深感国家独立自主之可贵。尊重独立、主权、领土完整，尊重各国自主选择社会制度和发展道路，互不干涉内政，照顾彼此重大关切，这是亚洲各国友好相处的重要基础。亚洲多样性突出，具有开放包容的传统，各国应该在平等基础上，促进不同文明交流对话，加深相互理解和彼此认同，为亚洲稳定和繁荣构筑坚实依托。	
Respect and trust each other. Many Asian countries had the agonizing experience of being bullied and humiliated by foreign powers, and know full well the value of national independence. Mutual respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual respect for each other's independent choice of social system and development path, mutual non-interference in each other's internal affairs, mutual accommodation of each other's major concerns are an important foundation on which Asian countries have lived with each other in amity. A region of great diversity, Asia has a tradition of openness and inclusiveness. Countries in this region should increase inter-civilization exchanges and dialogue on an equal footing for better mutual understanding and trust and lay a solid foundation for stability and prosperity in Asia.
——聚同化异。在亚洲各国交往史上，友好合作是主流，但也不乏一些遗留问题。邻国之间磕磕碰碰在所难免，关键是如何对待和处理。只有以对话和合作凝聚共识、化解分歧，才是地区长治久安最有效的保障。我们应该着眼大局、友好协商，共同参与国际和地区治理，为促进国际政治经济秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展发挥积极作用。	
Seek common ground while resolving differences. Although friendship and cooperation have been the mainstream in the history of relations among Asian countries, there are still numerous issues left over from history yet to be resolved. Differences and frictions are hardly avoidable among neighboring countries. What is important is how to handle and manage them properly. The most effective way to ensure long-term peace and stability in the region is to build consensus and resolve differences through dialogue and cooperation. We, Asian countries, should bear in mind the overall interests of the world, engage in friendly consultations, jointly participate in regional and international governance and contribute to the building of a more fair and equitable international political and economic order.
——合作共赢。发展经济、改善民生是亚洲各国面临的首要任务，加强互利合作是促进亚洲和睦相处的重要粘合剂。亚洲各国应该秉持联合自强、守望相助的亚洲意识，互帮互助，优势互补，扩大利益交融，合力推进自由贸易区和互联互通建设，深化区域经济一体化，实现共同发展，做大共同利益的蛋糕，增进亚洲各国人民福祉。	
Pursue win-win cooperation. It is a task of primary importance for Asian countries to grow economy and improve their people's well-being. Efforts to enhance mutually beneficial cooperation among them provide a strong adhesive for Asian countries to live in harmony with one another. Asian countries should, in the Asian spirit of strength through unity and mutual assistance, help each other and complement each other's strengths to expand converging interests. We should work in concert to make progress in building free trade areas, promote greater connectivity and deepen regional economic integration for the benefit of common development. Together, we should make a bigger pie of common interests and bring more benefits to all the people in Asia.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
我这次访问蒙古国，深深感到中蒙友好已经植根于两国人民心中，这是中蒙关系发展最大的信心和动力源泉。我相信，在两国人民支持下，中蒙关系的明天一定会更加美好。	
This trip has made me feel even more strongly that China-Mongolia friendship has already taken deep root in the hearts of our peoples. This is the biggest source of confidence and strength for the continued growth of our bilateral relations. I am confident that with the support of the people in both countries, China-Mongolia relationship will usher in an even brighter future.
今年是中国和蒙古国的马年。马是力量和进取的象征，深受中蒙两国人民喜爱。我衷心祝愿蒙古国国家建设龙马精神、万马奔腾，衷心祝愿中蒙全面战略伙伴关系快马加鞭、马到功成。让我们携手努力，让中蒙世代友好的种子广泛播撒在两国人民心中。	
This year marks the Year of Horse in both China and Mongolia. Horse symbolizes strength and progress, and it is therefore very popular among people in both countries. It is my sincere wish that Mongolia will make great strides forward in its national development just like ten thousand horses galloping ahead with full vitality. I also sincerely hope that China-Mongolia comprehensive strategic partnership will advance at fast speed and achieve resounding success. Let us work hand in hand to sow the seed of lasting friendship in the hearts of our two peoples.
巴耶里拉！谢谢！	
Bayarlalaa! Thank you!
95. 习近平在世界互联网大会上发表主旨演讲
尊敬的侯赛因总统，
尊敬的梅德韦杰夫总理，
尊敬的马西莫夫总理，
尊敬的萨里耶夫总理，
尊敬的拉苏尔佐达总理，
尊敬的阿齐莫夫第一副总理，
尊敬的索瓦莱尼副首相，
尊敬的吴红波副秘书长，
尊敬的赵厚麟秘书长，
尊敬的施瓦布先生，
各位部长，各位大使，
各位嘉宾，各位朋友：	
President Mamnoon Hussain,
Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev,
Prime Minister Karim Massimov,
Prime Minister Temir Sariyev,
Prime Minister Qohir Rasulzoda,
First Deputy Prime Minister Rustam Azimov,
Deputy Prime Minister Siaosi Sovaleni,
Under-Secretary-General Wu Hongbo,
Secretary-General Zhao Houlin,
Dr. Klaus Schwab,
Ministers and Ambassadors,
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
欢迎各位嘉宾来到美丽的乌镇，共商世界互联网发展大计。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾出席第二届世界互联网大会，表示热烈的欢迎！对大会的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！	
Welcome to the beautiful town of Wuzhen for this important discussion on the development of the Internet in the world. First of all, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I wish to extend our warm welcome to all participants to the second World Internet Conference, and express warm congratulations on the opening of the conference.
我曾在浙江工作多年，多次来过乌镇。今天再次来到这里，既感到亲切熟悉，又感到耳目一新。去年，首届世界互联网大会在这里举办，推动了网络创客、网上医院、智慧旅游等快速发展，让这个白墙黛瓦的千年古镇焕发出新的魅力。乌镇的网络化、智慧化，是传统和现代、人文和科技融合发展的生动写照，是中国互联网创新发展的一个缩影，也生动体现了全球互联网共享发展的理念。	
I have worked in Zhejiang for many years and visited Wuzhen on several occasions. Today, coming back to Wuzhen, I find the town both familiar and new. The first World Internet Conference held here last year gave a strong boost to the development of online maker, online hospital, smart tourism and other Internet applications, and added a new, fascinating dimension to the charm of this historical town. An Internet-empowered and smart town, Wuzhen is a vivid example of what can be achieved by combining tradition with modernity and integrating culture with science. It showcases the innovative development of the Internet in China and reflects the principle that global Internet development is indeed shared by all.
纵观世界文明史，人类先后经历了农业革命、工业革命、信息革命。每一次产业技术革命，都给人类生产生活带来巨大而深刻的影响。现在，以互联网为代表的信息技术日新月异，引领了社会生产新变革，创造了人类生活新空间，拓展了国家治理新领域，极大提高了人类认识世界、改造世界的能力。互联网让世界变成了“鸡犬之声相闻”的地球村，相隔万里的人们不再“老死不相往来”。可以说，世界因互联网而更多彩，生活因互联网而更丰富。
Looking at the history of world civilizations, humanity has progressed along with agricultural, industrial and information revolutions. Each of these industrial and technological revolutions has had great and profound impact on our way of production and life. Today, information technologies represented by the Internet are experiencing rapid changes with each passing day. They have brought about new ways of social production, created new space for people's life, opened new horizons of state governance, and enhanced our ability to understand and shape the world. The Internet has turned the world into a global village where distance no longer prevents people from interacting with each other. Communication is made easier than ever before. Indeed, thanks to the Internet, our world has become more colorful and people now live a fuller life.
中国正处在信息化快速发展的历史进程之中。中国高度重视互联网发展，自21年前接入国际互联网以来，我们按照积极利用、科学发展、依法管理、确保安全的思路，加强信息基础设施建设，发展网络经济，推进信息惠民。同时，我们依法开展网络空间治理，网络空间日渐清朗。目前，中国有6.7亿网民、413万多家网站，网络深度融入经济社会发展、融入人民生活。	
China is going through a historic process of rapid application of information technologies. China attaches great importance to Internet development. Since China was connected to World Wide Web 21 years ago, we have, in keeping with the principles of proactive utilization, rational development, law-based regulation and assurance of security, strengthened IT infrastructure, developed cyber economy and made life better for our people through IT application. In the meantime, we have conducted governance of cyberspace in accordance with law, and ensured a clean environment in the cyberspace. Today, China is already home to 670 million Internet users and over 4.13 million websites. The Internet is now deeply integrated into China's economic and social development and the life of the Chinese people.
中共十八届五中全会提出了创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念。“十三五”时期，中国将大力实施网络强国战略、国家大数据战略、“互联网+”行动计划，发展积极向上的网络文化，拓展网络经济空间，促进互联网和经济社会融合发展。我们的目标，就是要让互联网发展成果惠及13亿多中国人民，更好造福各国人民。	
The Fifth Plenum of the 18th CPC Central Committee has put forward the concept of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. During the 13th Five-Year Plan period, China will vigorously implement the national cyber development strategy, the national big data strategy and the "Internet Plus" action plan. We will develop an uplifting cyber culture, open up more space for cyber economy, and promote the integration of Internet development with economic and social progress. Our goal is to ensure that the more than 1.3 billion Chinese people and people across the world can all enjoy the benefits of Internet development.
各位嘉宾、各位朋友！	
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
随着世界多极化、经济全球化、文化多样化、社会信息化深入发展，互联网对人类文明进步将发挥更大促进作用。同时，互联网领域发展不平衡、规则不健全、秩序不合理等问题日益凸显。不同国家和地区信息鸿沟不断拉大，现有网络空间治理规则难以反映大多数国家意愿和利益；世界范围内侵害个人隐私、侵犯知识产权、网络犯罪等时有发生，网络监听、网络攻击、网络恐怖主义活动等成为全球公害。面对这些问题和挑战，国际社会应该在相互尊重、相互信任的基础上，加强对话合作，推动互联网全球治理体系变革，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间，建立多边、民主、透明的全球互联网治理体系。	
With the deepening of world multi-polarity, economic globalization, cultural diversity and IT application, the Internet will only play a bigger role in the progress of human civilization. At the same time, however, such problems as unbalanced development, inadequate rules and inequitable order have become more evident in the field of the Internet. The information gap between different countries and regions is widening, and the existing rules governing the cyberspace hardly reflect the desires and interests of the majority of countries. Infringements of individual privacy and intellectual property rights as well as cyber crimes happen from time to time around the world. Cyber surveillance, cyber attack and cyber terrorism have become a global scourge. In the face of these problems and challenges, the international community must enhance dialogue and cooperation on the basis of mutual respect and trust, promote transformation of the global Internet governance system, and work together to foster a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cyberspace and put in place a multilateral, democratic and transparent global Internet governance system.
推进全球互联网治理体系变革，应该坚持以下原则。	
To make progress in the transformation of the global Internet governance system, the following principles must be upheld:
——尊重网络主权。《联合国宪章》确立的主权平等原则是当代国际关系的基本准则，覆盖国与国交往各个领域，其原则和精神也应该适用于网络空间。我们应该尊重各国自主选择网络发展道路、网络管理模式、互联网公共政策和平等参与国际网络空间治理的权利，不搞网络霸权，不干涉他国内政，不从事、纵容或支持危害他国国家安全的网络活动。
- Respect for cyber sovereignty. The principle of sovereign equality enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations is one of the basic norms in contemporary international relations. It covers all aspects of state-to-state relations, which also includes cyberspace. We should respect the right of individual countries to independently choose their own path of cyber development, model of cyber regulation and Internet public policies, and participate in international cyberspace governance on an equal footing. No country should pursue cyber hegemony, interfere in other countries' internal affairs or engage in, connive at or support cyber activities that undermine other countries' national security.
——维护和平安全。一个安全稳定繁荣的网络空间，对各国乃至世界都具有重大意义。在现实空间，战火硝烟仍未散去，恐怖主义阴霾难除，违法犯罪时有发生。网络空间，不应成为各国角力的战场，更不能成为违法犯罪的温床。各国应该共同努力，防范和反对利用网络空间进行的恐怖、淫秽、贩毒、洗钱、赌博等犯罪活动。不论是商业窃密，还是对政府网络发起黑客攻击，都应该根据相关法律和国际公约予以坚决打击。维护网络安全不应有双重标准，不能一个国家安全而其他国家不安全，一部分国家安全而另一部分国家不安全，更不能以牺牲别国安全谋求自身所谓绝对安全。	
- Maintenance of peace and security. A secure, stable and prosperous cyberspace is of great significance to all countries and the world. In the real world, there are still lingering wars, shadows of terrorism and occurrences of crimes. Cyberspace should not become a battlefield for countries to wrestle with one another, still less should it become a hotbed for crimes. Countries should work together to prevent and oppose the use of cyberspace for criminal activities such as terrorism, pornography, drug trafficking, money laundering and gambling. All cyber crimes, be they commercial cyber thefts or hacker attacks against government networks, should be firmly combated in accordance with relevant laws and international conventions. No double standards should be allowed in upholding cyber security. We cannot just have the security of one or some countries while leaving the rest insecure, still less should one seek the so-called absolute security of itself at the expense of the security of others.
——促进开放合作。“天下兼相爱则治，交相恶则乱。”完善全球互联网治理体系，维护网络空间秩序，必须坚持同舟共济、互信互利的理念，摈弃零和博弈、赢者通吃的旧观念。各国应该推进互联网领域开放合作，丰富开放内涵，提高开放水平，搭建更多沟通合作平台，创造更多利益契合点、合作增长点、共赢新亮点，推动彼此在网络空间优势互补、共同发展，让更多国家和人民搭乘信息时代的快车、共享互联网发展成果。	
- Promotion of openness and cooperation. As an old Chinese saying goes, "When there is mutual care, the world will be in peace; when there is mutual hatred, the world will be in chaos." To improve the global Internet governance system and maintain the order of cyberspace, we should firmly follow the concept of mutual support, mutual trust and mutual benefit and reject the old mentality of zero-sum game or "winner takes all". All countries should advance opening-up and cooperation in cyberspace and further substantiate and enhance the opening-up efforts. We should also build more platforms for communication and cooperation and create more converging points of interests, growth areas for cooperation and new highlights for win-win outcomes. Efforts should be made to advance complementarity of strengths and common development of all countries in cyberspace so that more countries and people will ride on the fast train of the information age and share the benefits of Internet development.
——构建良好秩序。网络空间同现实社会一样，既要提倡自由，也要保持秩序。自由是秩序的目的，秩序是自由的保障。我们既要尊重网民交流思想、表达意愿的权利，也要依法构建良好网络秩序，这有利于保障广大网民合法权益。网络空间不是“法外之地”。网络空间是虚拟的，但运用网络空间的主体是现实的，大家都应该遵守法律，明确各方权利义务。要坚持依法治网、依法办网、依法上网，让互联网在法治轨道上健康运行。同时，要加强网络伦理、网络文明建设，发挥道德教化引导作用，用人类文明优秀成果滋养网络空间、修复网络生态。	
- Cultivation of good order. Like in the real world, freedom and order are both necessary in cyberspace. Freedom is what order is meant for and order is the guarantee for freedom. We should respect Internet users' rights to exchange their ideas and express their minds, and we should also build a good order in cyberspace in accordance with law as it will help protect the legitimate rights and interests of all Internet users. Cyberspace is not a place beyond the rule of law. Cyberspace is virtual, but players in cyberspace are real. Everyone should abide by the law, with the rights and obligations of parties concerned clearly defined. Cyberspace must be governed, operated and used in accordance with law, so that the Internet can enjoy sound development under the rule of law. In the meantime, greater efforts should be made to strengthen ethical standards and civilized behaviors in cyberspace. We should give full play to the role of moral teachings in guiding the use of the Internet to make sure that the fine accomplishments of human civilizations will nourish the growth of cyberspace and help rehabilitate cyber ecology.
各位嘉宾、各位朋友！	
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
网络空间是人类共同的活动空间，网络空间前途命运应由世界各国共同掌握。各国应该加强沟通、扩大共识、深化合作，共同构建网络空间命运共同体。对此，我愿提出5点主张。
Cyberspace is the common space of activities for mankind. The future of cyberspace should be in the hands of all countries. Countries should step up communication, broaden consensus and deepen cooperation to jointly build a community of shared future in cyberspace. To this end, I wish to put forward five proposals.
第一，加快全球网络基础设施建设，促进互联互通。网络的本质在于互联，信息的价值在于互通。只有加强信息基础设施建设，铺就信息畅通之路，不断缩小不同国家、地区、人群间的信息鸿沟，才能让信息资源充分涌流。中国正在实施“宽带中国”战略，预计到2020年，中国宽带网络将基本覆盖所有行政村，打通网络基础设施“最后一公里”，让更多人用上互联网。中国愿同各方一道，加大资金投入，加强技术支持，共同推动全球网络基础设施建设，让更多发展中国家和人民共享互联网带来的发展机遇。	
First, speed up the building of global Internet infrastructure and promote inter-connectivity. The essence of the Internet is connectivity, and herein lies the value of information. We should strengthen the building of IT infrastructure for information to travel on a smooth road. Only in this way can we narrow the digital divide between different countries, regions and communities and ensure full flow of information resources. China is now implementing the "Broadband China" strategy. It is estimated that by 2020, broadband network in China will basically cover all the villages. The "last kilometer" of Internet infrastructure will be linked up thanks to this strategy and more people will have access to the Internet. China stands ready to work with all parties concerned to come up with more investment and technical support to jointly advance the building of global Internet infrastructure and enable more developing countries and their people to share the development opportunities brought by the Internet.
第二，打造网上文化交流共享平台，促进交流互鉴。文化因交流而多彩，文明因互鉴而丰富。互联网是传播人类优秀文化、弘扬正能量的重要载体。中国愿通过互联网架设国际交流桥梁，推动世界优秀文化交流互鉴，推动各国人民情感交流、心灵沟通。我们愿同各国一道，发挥互联网传播平台优势，让各国人民了解中华优秀文化，让中国人民了解各国优秀文化，共同推动网络文化繁荣发展，丰富人们精神世界，促进人类文明进步。	
Second, build an online platform for cultural exchange and mutual learning. Culture and civilization are enriched through exchange and mutual learning. The Internet is an important carrier to spread mankind's fine cultures and promote positive energy. China is willing to build, through the Internet, a bridge of international cultural interaction for the fine cultures of the world to learn from each other and for people of all countries to share their feelings and enhance mutual understanding. We will work with all other countries to leverage the strength of the Internet as a communication platform, so that people of other countries will come to know more about China's fine culture and the Chinese people will learn more of theirs. Together, we will promote the prosperity and development of cyber culture, which will enrich people's mind and thinking, and advance human civilization and progress.
第三，推动网络经济创新发展，促进共同繁荣。当前，世界经济复苏艰难曲折，中国经济也面临着一定下行压力。解决这些问题，关键在于坚持创新驱动发展，开拓发展新境界。中国正在实施“互联网+”行动计划，推进“数字中国”建设，发展分享经济，支持基于互联网的各类创新，提高发展质量和效益。中国互联网蓬勃发展，为各国企业和创业者提供了广阔市场空间。中国开放的大门永远不会关上，利用外资的政策不会变，对外商投资企业合法权益的保障不会变，为各国企业在华投资兴业提供更好服务的方向不会变。只要遵守中国法律，我们热情欢迎各国企业和创业者在华投资兴业。我们愿意同各国加强合作，通过发展跨境电子商务、建设信息经济示范区等，促进世界范围内投资和贸易发展，推动全球数字经济发展。
Third, promote innovative development of cyber economy for common prosperity. The world economy is on a difficult and tortuous path to recovery. The Chinese economy is also under certain downward pressure. Solutions lie in innovation-driven development, which will open new horizons of development. China is now implementing the "Internet Plus" action plan, advancing the building of "Digital China", developing the sharing economy, and supporting Internet-based innovation in all forms, with a view to improving the quality and efficiency of development. The robust growth of China's Internet has provided a big market for enterprises and business starters of all countries. China's door of opening-up will never close. Our policy towards foreign investment will not change. Our protection of legitimate rights and interests of foreign-invested enterprises will not change. And the direction of providing better services to foreign companies in their investment and business activities in China will not change. As long as they abide by China's laws, we warmly welcome enterprises and business starters from all countries to invest and do business in China. We are ready to step up cooperation with all countries. Through the development of cross-border e-commerce and the building of information economy demonstration zones, we will be able to spur the growth of worldwide investment and trade, and promote global development of digital economy.
第四，保障网络安全，促进有序发展。安全和发展是一体之两翼、驱动之双轮。安全是发展的保障，发展是安全的目的。网络安全是全球性挑战，没有哪个国家能够置身事外、独善其身，维护网络安全是国际社会的共同责任。各国应该携手努力，共同遏制信息技术滥用，反对网络监听和网络攻击，反对网络空间军备竞赛。中国愿同各国一道，加强对话交流，有效管控分歧，推动制定各方普遍接受的网络空间国际规则，制定网络空间国际反恐公约，健全打击网络犯罪司法协助机制，共同维护网络空间和平安全。	
Fourth, maintain cyber security and promote orderly development. Security and development are like the two wings of a bird or the two wheels of a cart. Security ensures development, and development is what security is aimed at. Cyber security is a global challenge. No country can stay aloof or immune from it. Maintaining cyber security is the shared responsibility of the international community. All countries should work together to contain the abuse of information technology, oppose cyber surveillance and cyber attacks and reject arms race in cyberspace. China will work with all other countries to step up dialogue and exchange, and effectively manage differences. We should push for the formulation of international cyberspace rules accepted by all parties as well as an international convention against terrorism in cyberspace, improve the legal assistance mechanism to fight cyber crimes and jointly uphold peace and security in cyberspace.
第五，构建互联网治理体系，促进公平正义。国际网络空间治理，应该坚持多边参与、多方参与，由大家商量着办，发挥政府、国际组织、互联网企业、技术社群、民间机构、公民个人等各个主体作用，不搞单边主义，不搞一方主导或由几方凑在一起说了算。各国应该加强沟通交流，完善网络空间对话协商机制，研究制定全球互联网治理规则，使全球互联网治理体系更加公正合理，更加平衡地反映大多数国家意愿和利益。举办世界互联网大会，就是希望搭建全球互联网共享共治的一个平台，共同推动互联网健康发展。	
Fifth, build an Internet governance system to promote equity and justice. International cyberspace governance should feature a multilateral approach with multi-party participation. It should be based on consultation among all parties, leveraging the role of various players, including governments, international organizations, Internet companies, technology communities, non-government institutions and individual citizens. There should be no unilateralism. Decisions should not be made with one party calling the shots or only a few parties discussing among themselves. All countries should step up communication and exchange, improve dialogue and consultation mechanism on cyberspace, and study and formulate global Internet governance rules, so that the global Internet governance system becomes fairer and more reasonable and reflects in a more balanced way the aspiration and interests of the majority of countries. This World Internet Conference is held precisely for the purpose of building a platform for global Internet to be shared and governed by all and working together for the healthy development of the Internet.
各位嘉宾、各位朋友！	
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
“凡益之道，与时偕行。”互联网虽然是无形的，但运用互联网的人们都是有形的，互联网是人类的共同家园。让这个家园更美丽、更干净、更安全，是国际社会的共同责任。让我们携起手来，共同推动网络空间互联互通、共享共治，为开创人类发展更加美好的未来助力
"All good principles should adapt to changing times to remain relevant." While the Internet is invisible, Internet users are visible. The Internet is the common home of mankind. Making it better, cleaner and safer is the common responsibility of the international community. Let us work hand in hand to promote an interconnected cyberspace shared and governed by all, and make contribution to a better future for the progress of all mankind.
最后，预祝大会取得圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish the conference a complete success.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
101. 习近平在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的演讲
发挥亚太引领作用 应对世界经济挑战
——在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的主旨演讲
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年11月18日，马尼拉）
The Leading Role of the Asia-Pacific In Meeting Global Economic Challenges
-- Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the APEC CEO Summit
Manila, 18 November 2015
陈觉中主席先生，
亚太工商界各位代表，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Chairman Tony Tan Caktiong,
Business leaders from the Asia-Pacific,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
大家好！很高兴再次同大家见面。去年11月，我们相聚北京，共同探讨推进亚太经济合作思路和举措，对那天的场景我记忆犹新。	
Good morning! I am delighted to meet all of you again. Last November, we gathered in Beijing to explore the ways and means to advance Asia-Pacific economic cooperation. That meeting is still fresh in my memory.
亚太经合组织是本地区最重要的经贸论坛，也是亚太工商界参与最深的多边合作平台。我们处在一个变革的时代，无论是领导人还是企业家，都需要立足当前、着眼长远，准确把握世界大势，谋划应对之策。	
APEC is not only the most important economic and trade forum in our region, but also the multilateral cooperation platform in which Asia-Pacific business communities are most deeply involved. We live in the age of transformation. Both political leaders and entrepreneurs need to focus on the present while keeping an eye on the future in order to stay on top of global trends and adapt to the changing world.
两天前，我刚刚出席了二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会。会上，各国领导人深入探讨了当前世界经济形势面临的重大挑战和应对举措。大家的基本共识是，世界经济虽然平缓复苏，但基础并不牢固，存在较多不稳定性和不确定性。很多国家担心，发达经济体货币政策分化，引发资本无序流动，全球债务高企，造成市场信心不足，加上国际金融和大宗商品市场波动，对新兴市场国家和发展中国家带来更大冲击。全球经济增长持续低于预期，潜在增长率下滑，国际贸易和投资低迷，世界经济可能出现多个引擎同时失速进而陷入停滞状态。世界经济要从亚健康完全走向健康，很可能经历一个长期曲折的过程。	
Two days ago, I attended the G20 Summit in Antalya, where world leaders had in-depth discussions on the major challenges facing global economy and the ways to deal with them. The basic view we came to share is that the global economy, though on a course of slow recovery, is not yet solidly based and still fraught with considerable destabilizing factors and uncertainties. Many countries expressed worries that the divergence of the monetary policies of the advanced economies may lead to erratic capital flows, high global indebtedness and low market confidence. All this, coupled with fluctuations in the global financial and commodities markets, will exert a greater impact on emerging markets and developing countries in general. Global growth continues to fall short of expectations with sliding trend of potential growth rates, and international trade and investment remain weak. The world economy might encounter simultaneous slowdown of multiple growth engines and get stuck in stagnation. It will probably take a long and tortuous process before the global economy becomes healthy again.
在世界经济充满挑战的大背景下，亚太经济也面临着诸多现实和潜在的困难和风险。亚太经济如何保持正确发展方向，如何找到新经济增长点、巩固增长引擎地位，值得认真对待和深入思考。	
Against the backdrop of multiple challenges in the world economy, the Asia-Pacific economy is also confronted with many immediate and potential difficulties and risks. How to keep the Asia-Pacific economy on the right track? How to find new growth areas and strengthen the Asia-Pacific's status as a growth engine? These questions merit close attention and serious exploration.
面对世界经济中的激流险滩，亚太这艘巨轮必须校准航向、把好舵盘，亚太各经济体必须勇于担当、同舟共济，努力推动全球增长。	
Facing the dangerous rapids and shoals in the world economy, we must steer the giant ship of the Asia-Pacific in the right direction. All economies in the region must act in a responsible manner and work in unison to promote global growth.
第一，坚持推进改革创新。要解决世界经济深层次问题，单纯靠货币刺激政策是不够的，必须下决心在推进经济结构性改革方面作更大努力，使供给体系更适应需求结构的变化。亚太在这方面要走在世界前面，努力创新发展理念、发展模式、发展路径。要加快产业升级换代，以科技创新带动产品、管理、商业模式创新，提高亚太经济体在全球供应链中的地位，共建共享协调、开放、包容的全球价值链。发达经济体要积极分享最佳实践，主动转让技术，发展中经济体要勇于探索、增加投入、迎头赶上。要发挥亚太经合组织的政策平台和孵化器功能，在互联网经济、蓝色经济、绿色经济、城镇化等领域加强合作，增强自主创新能力。	
First, we must press ahead with reform and innovation. To address the deep-seated problems in the world economy, monetary stimulus alone is not enough. We must commit ourselves to even greater efforts to advance economic structural reform so as to better adapt supply to the changing pattern of demand. This is an area where the Asia-Pacific should take the lead by adopting new approach, model and pathway of development. Efforts should also be made to expedite industrial upgrading so that science and technology innovation will bring about new products, management and business models, move Asia-Pacific economies up in the global supply chain and enable us to jointly build and benefit from a coordinated, open and inclusive global value chain. While developed economies need to be more forthcoming about sharing best practices and transferring technologies, developing economies should explore more boldly, increase input and try to catch up more quickly. We need to leverage the role of APEC as a policy platform and an "incubator" for strengthened cooperation in such areas as Internet economy, blue economy, green economy and urbanization, with a view to improving the region's capacity for independent innovation.
第二，坚持构建开放型经济。多年来，亚太坚持大开放、大融合、大发展，走出独具特色、充满活力的区域经济合作道路，堪称发展水平悬殊的经济体共同推进一体化的典范。去年，亚太经合组织领导人在北京启动了亚太自由贸易区进程，迈出了历史性的一步。当前，新的区域自由贸易安排不断涌现，引发大家对碎片化倾向的种种担忧。我们要加快亚太自由贸易区建设，推进区域经济一体化。要平等参与、充分协商，最大程度增强自由贸易安排的开放性和包容性，提高亚太开放型经济水平、维护多边贸易体制。要致力于合作共赢，反对保护主义，促进公平竞争。	
Second, we must build an open economy. Over the years, the Asia-Pacific has pursued greater openness, integration and development and found a unique path of dynamic regional economic cooperation, setting a good example of integration endeavor involving economies vastly different in level of development. Last year, APEC economic leaders took a historic step forward by kicking off in Beijing the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) process. With various new regional free trade arrangements cropping up, worries about fragmentation are on the increase. We need to accelerate the realization of FTAAP and take regional economic integration forward. We need to encourage equal-footed participation and extensive consultation, and make free trade arrangements open and inclusive to the extent possible with a view to enhancing economic openness in our region and upholding the multilateral trading regime. We must commit ourselves to win-win cooperation, oppose protectionism and promote fair competition.
第三，坚持落实发展议程。中国古代哲人说：“凡治国之道，必先富民。”发展的最终目的是造福人民，必须让发展成果更多惠及全体人民。前不久，联合国发展峰会通过了2030年可持续发展议程。在二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会上，我倡议二十国集团成员国积极行动起来，落实好可持续发展议程。为此，要把落实可持续发展议程纳入各自国家发展战略，确保有效落实。要建立全面发展伙伴关系，调动政府、企业、民间等各方面力量，为落实可持续发展议程作出贡献。要推动包容和谐发展，尽早实现可持续发展议程设定的各项指标，同时通过落实可持续发展议程，为提升发展质量和效益创造新的空间、实现相互促进。	
Third, we must implement the Sustainable Development Agenda. An ancient Chinese philosopher said, "The key to running a country is to make its people better-off." The ultimate aim of development is to serve the people by bringing more and more fruits of development to all our people. Not long ago, the UN Sustainable Development Summit adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. At the G20 Summit in Antalya, I called on the members to take actions and implement the Sustainable Development Agenda. To this end, we need to incorporate the Sustainable Development Agenda into our respective national development strategies and ensure its effective implementation. It is important that we establish an all-round partnership on development, mobilizing the government, enterprises and social resources in a concerted effort of implementation. It is necessary to promote inclusive and harmonious development, meet the targets of the Sustainable Development Agenda as soon as possible and, in so doing, create more room for improved quality and efficiency of development and ensure the tasks are mutually reinforcing.
第四，坚持推进互联互通。互联互通的根本目的，是使亚太经济血脉更加通畅，从而扩大经济社会发展潜力。互联互通要注重基础设施、制度规章、人员交流三位一体，并行推动政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通。要通过互联互通对接各国发展战略和规划，找准优先领域和项目。要通过互联互通，实现各区域、各国生产要素互通有无、产业产能优势互补、发展经验互学互鉴。要优化亚太供应链、产业链、价值链，形成亚太规模经济效应和联动效应，实现亚太经济整体振兴。去年，我们在北京通过了亚太经合组织互联互通蓝图，要抓好落实，取得实实在在的效果。	
Fourth, we must promote connectivity. Connectivity will make the Asia-Pacific economy more vibrant, which will in turn increase potential in economic and social development. It focuses on infrastructure, rules and institutions and personnel movement, and calls for progress in policy communication, infrastructure linkage, trade flow, financing arrangements and friendly exchanges between the people. Through connectivity efforts, countries can align their national development strategies, plans and programs, and identify priority areas and projects. Through connectivity efforts, regions and countries can trade in production factors, complement each other's industrial advantages and production capacity, and learn from each other's development experience. The supply chain, industry chain and value chain of the Asia-Pacific need to be improved so as to achieve economy of scale and combined effects in the interest of overall invigoration of the Asia-Pacific economy. Last year, we adopted in Beijing the APEC Connectivity Blueprint, which needs to be earnestly followed through for tangible results.
“道虽迩，不行不至；事虽小，不为不成。”任何蓝图都不会自动变为现实，实现上述目标，需要亚太各成员携手并肩、共同努力。我们要加强政策对话和协调，以亚太经合组织为平台，着力形成合力。要坚持以发展为中心，全力营造有利于发展的和平环境，决不让任何事情干扰亚太发展进程。要坚持合作共赢理念和命运共同体意识，在竞争中合作，在合作中实现共同发展。要坚持多元发展，尊重彼此根据自身实际选择的发展道路，通过对话协商的方式解决分歧。我相信，宽阔的太平洋将成为亚太合作的桥梁、友好的纽带、共同的家园。	
"Even the shortest journey can't be finished without taking the first step. Even the most trivial task can't be completed without taking actions." No blueprint will just automatically come true. When it comes to realizing the goals we set, all APEC members need to work hand in hand. We must step up policy dialogue and coordination and use APEC as a platform to create synergy. We must focus on development, spare no effort in fostering an environment of peace conducive to development and never allow anything to disrupt the Asia-Pacific development process. We must adhere to the concept of win-win cooperation and community of shared future, cooperating while competing, and achieving common development through cooperation. We must recognize diversity in development path, respect each other's development paths chosen in light of our specific conditions, and resolve differences through dialogue and consultation. I am confident that the vast Pacific Ocean will become a bridge of cooperation, a bond of friendship and a place we call our common home.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
作为世界第二大经济体，中国经济走势受到大家关注。今年，在世界经济增长放缓的背景下，中国积极应对各种困难和挑战，加强宏观调控，有力推动改革，一些经济指标在月度、季度间有所波动，但经济仍然运行在合理区间，保持平稳较快发展。今年前三季度，中国经济增长6.9%，对世界经济增长的贡献率达到30%左右。这是在10万亿美元高基数之上的增长，也是调结构、转方式进程中的增长，这一结果来之不易。	
As the world's second largest economy, China's economy is very much in the international spotlight. With global growth slowing down, China is working vigorously to overcome difficulties and meet challenges by strengthening macro-regulation and effectively advancing reforms. Though our monthly and quarterly economic indicators have fluctuated a bit, the overall economy has operated within the reasonable range and maintained steady and fairly rapid growth. In the first three quarters, China's economy grew by 6.9%, contributing approximately 30% to global growth. Such a growth rate was achieved by a big economy of over 10 trillion dollars and in the process of economic restructuring and transformation. This is indeed a hard-won result.
总的看，中国经济发展长期向好的基本面没有变，经济韧性好、潜力足、回旋余地大的基本特征没有变，经济持续增长的良好支撑基础和条件没有变，经济结构调整优化的前进态势没有变。同时，中国经济仍然面临复杂的内外环境和较大的下行压力，正经历着改革阵痛，机遇前所未有，挑战也前所未有。	
In general, China's positive economic fundamentals and long-term trajectory remain unchanged. What also remain unchanged are the basic fact that China's economy possesses strong resilience, great potential and ample room for maneuver; the strong support and conditions favorable for continued growth; and the forward movement of the country's economic restructuring and upgrading. On the other hand, China's economy is still grappling with a complicated internal and external environment, considerable downward pressure and the throes of deep reforms. The opportunities are unprecedented, but so are the challenges.
不久前，中共十八届五中全会通过了中国“十三五”规划建议，提出了创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，并就“十三五”时期中国经济社会发展提出一系列重大改革举措。“十三五”时期是全面建成小康社会的决胜阶段。我们将加快改革创新，加快转方式、调结构，着力解决发展进程中的难题，培育发展新动力，打造发展新优势，创造发展新机遇。	
Recently, the fifth plenum of the 18th CPC Central Committee adopted the proposal for the 13th five-year plan on economic and social development, putting forth the concept of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, and proposing a series of major reforms in next five years which is the final stage of our quest for a society of initial prosperity in all respects. We will step up reform and innovation, accelerate the shift of growth model and economic restructuring, earnestly address the difficult issues in development, cultivate new drivers and new edges for development, and create more fresh opportunities for development.
——我们将更加注重效益质量。我们将着力转变经济发展方式，推动经济从规模扩张转向结构优化，从要素驱动转向创新驱动，从主要依靠投资、出口拉动转向依靠消费、投资、出口协调拉动，推动信息化和工业化深度融合，工业化和城镇化良性互动，城镇化和农业现代化互促互进。可以肯定，所有这些都将创造出新的发展动力和增长空间。	
-- We will pay still more attention to efficiency and quality. We will work hard to shift the growth model, from expanding scale to improving structure, from factor driven to innovation driven, and from depending mainly on investment and export to relying on coordinated increase in consumption, investment and export. We will work for a deeper convergence of IT application and industrialization, a sound interaction of industrialization and urbanization, and the mutual reinforcement of urbanization and agricultural modernization. All this, we can say for sure, will bring forth new development drivers and greater room for China's growth.
——我们将更加注重创新驱动。我们将大力实施创新驱动发展战略，把发展着力点更多放在创新上，发挥创新激励经济增长的乘数效应，破除体制机制障碍，让市场真正成为配置创新资源的决定性力量，让企业真正成为技术创新主体。	
-- We will pay still more attention to innovation. While vigorously implementing the strategy of an innovation-driven development, we will lay greater emphasis on innovation and take full advantage of its multiplier effect in galvanizing growth. We will do away with institutional obstacles, and let the market be the decisive force in allocating innovation resources and the enterprises the key players in technological innovation.
——我们将更加注重公平公正。我们将从人民最关心最直接最现实的利益出发，着力构建公平公正、共建共享的发展新机制，让经济发展更具包容性。我们将着力解决难点问题，未来5年我们将使中国现行标准下7000多万农村贫困人口全部脱贫，贫困县全部脱帽。这也是中国落实2030年可持续发展议程的重要一步。	
-- We will pay still more attention to equity and justice. Always bearing in mind the most direct and immediate interest of the people, we will build a new development mechanism that features equity, justice, joint efforts and sharing of benefits by all. In this way, we can make economic development more inclusive. We will concentrate our efforts on some tough issues. For example, in the next five years, all the remaining 70 million-plus rural people living in poverty by existing Chinese standard and all the designated poor counties will be lifted out of poverty, which will be an important part of our efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
——我们将更加注重绿色发展。我们将把生态文明建设融入经济社会发展各方面和全过程，致力于实现可持续发展。我们将全面提高适应气候变化能力，坚持节约资源和保护环境的基本国策，建设天蓝、地绿、水清的美丽中国。	
-- We will pay still more attention to green development. We will make ecological progress part and parcel of the entire process of our economic and social development with a view to achieving sustainable development. We will build up a strong capacity to adapt to climate change, stick to our basic state policy of resource conservation and environment protection, and turn China into a beautiful country with blue sky, green land and clear water.
——我们将更加注重对外开放。我们将实行更加积极主动的开放战略，努力构建开放型经济新体制，提高开放型经济水平。我们将加快推进高标准自由贸易区建设。中国－东盟自由贸易区升级谈判已接近完成，即将发挥其积极效应。中澳、中韩自由贸易协定有望于年内生效，成为推动经济增长的新动力。我们还愿同各方一道尽早完成区域全面经济伙伴关系的谈判，加快中日韩自由贸易区谈判进程。我们将继续推进外商投资管理体制改革，大幅减少外资准入限制，加强知识产权保护，营造公开透明、高效平等的市场环境。	
-- We will pay still more attention to opening to the outside world. While pushing for a more proactive strategy of opening-up, we will build a new system of open economy with an even higher level of openness. We will accelerate efforts to build high-standard FTAs. Talks are near conclusion on an upgraded China-ASEAN FTA, which is set to make a positive impact. China's bilateral FTAs with Australia and the ROK are both expected to come into force by the end of this year, giving a fresh boost to economic growth. China will also work with relevant parties to finish at an early date negotiations on the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) while accelerating talks on a China-Japan-ROK FTA. We will step up reforms of the foreign investors management system, substantially cut back on market access restrictions for foreign investment, improve IPR protection and foster an open, transparent, fair and highly efficient market environment.
我愿重申，中国利用外资的政策不会变，对外商投资企业合法权益的保护不会变，为各国企业在华投资兴业提供更好服务的方向不会变。中国开放的大门永远不会关上！	
Here I would like to reiterate that China's policy on welcoming foreign investment will not change, nor will its protection of the legitimate rights and interests of foreign-invested enterprises or its commitment to provide better services for them. China's door to the outside world will forever stay open.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国是亚太大家庭的一员，中国的发展起步于亚太，得益于亚太，也将继续立足亚太、造福亚太。两年前，我倡议共建丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路。两年来，“一带一路”得到60多个国家和国际组织积极响应和参与，势头已起，效应初显。	
China is a member of the Asia-Pacific family. We began our development here and we owe our development to the Asia-Pacific. We will continue to anchor ourselves here and deliver benefits to the region. Two years ago, I proposed the initiative of jointly building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. The initiative has since received warm responses from and active participation by over 60 countries and international organizations. The "Belt and Road" Initiative is gaining momentum and achieving some initial results.
我们坚持开放的区域主义，同域内外许多国家签署合作协议，实现政策和发展战略对接，促进经济要素有序自由流动、资源高效配置、市场深度融合。通过“一带一路”建设，我们将开展更大范围、更高水平、更深层次的区域合作，共同打造开放、包容、均衡、普惠的区域合作架构。	
Committed to open regionalism, China has signed cooperation agreements with many countries in and beyond the region to harmonize policies and development strategies and facilitate freer and more orderly flow of economic factors, more efficient allocation of resources and deeper integration of the markets. Through implementing the "Belt and Road" Initiative, we will go for even broader, deeper and more sophisticated cooperation at the regional level and jointly foster a regional framework of open, inclusive, balanced and mutually beneficial cooperation.
目前，主要经济走廊和一大批多边双边重大项目正在稳步推进。我们建立丝路基金并投入运营。我们同50多个国家一道积极筹建亚洲基础设施投资银行，打造新型投融资平台，预计亚投行将于年底前正式成立，为一批重大项目提供融资支持。我们围绕经贸、能源、投资、人文等重点领域逐步建立和完善一批新平台，激发现有双边和多边机制新活力。	
At present, some key economic corridors and a large number of major multilateral and bilateral projects are making steady progress. China has established and put into operation the Silk Road Fund, and is now working actively with more than 50 countries to prepare the launching of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), a new type of investment and financing institution that is expected to be officially up and running by the end of this year. It will provide financing support for a number of important projects. What is more, we will gradually put in place new cooperation platforms in such priority areas as economy and trade, energy, investment, people-to-people and cultural exchanges, and work to reinvigorate the existing bilateral and multilateral mechanisms.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
亚太工商界是亚太发展的主力军，是创新创业的领头羊。过去，亚太工商界为本地区繁荣发展作出了重大贡献，未来也承载着重要使命。我们欢迎亚太工商界继续参与到中国发展进程中来，共享机遇和利益。我们也期待亚太工商界为亚太经济长远发展和世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长作出更大贡献。	
Asia-Pacific business communities represent a principal force for development in the region and a pioneer in innovation and entrepreneurship. Having made significant contributions to regional prosperity and development, you carry an important mission to shape the region's future. We welcome the continued participation of Asia-Pacific business communities in China's development in which you can share our opportunities and potential benefits. We also look forward to your greater contribution to the region's long-term economic development and to the strong, sustainable and balanced growth of the world economy.
明年9月，中国将在杭州主办二十国集团领导人第十一次峰会。我欢迎亚太工商界积极参与在华举办的各项活动，共同为世界经济出谋划策、贡献力量。	
Next September, China will host the 11th G20 Summit in the city of Hangzhou. I welcome the active participation of Asia-Pacific business communities in the events in China, where all can share their ideas and help build a stronger world economy.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
112. 习近平在华盛顿州当地政府和美国友好团体联合欢迎宴会上的演讲
在华盛顿州当地政府和美国友好团体联合欢迎宴会上的演讲
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
2015年9月22日，西雅图
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Welcoming Dinner Hosted by Local Governments And Friendly Organizations in the United States
Seattle, 22 September 2015
尊敬的基辛格博士，　　
尊敬的英斯利州长、
普利茨克部长、
默里市长，
尊敬的希尔斯主席、
菲尔茨主席，　　
女士们，先生们，
朋友们：	
Dr. Henry Kissinger,
Governor Jay Inslee of the State of Washington,
Secretary of Commerce Penny Pritzker,
Mayor Ed Murray of Seattle,
Chairwoman Carla Hills of the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations,
Chairman Mark Fields of the U.S.-China Business Council,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
大家好！谢谢基辛格博士的介绍。基辛格博士总能说出一些新颖的观点，他的介绍让我对自己也有了一个新的认识角度。华盛顿州、西雅图市是我对美国进行国事访问的第一站，有机会在这里同各位新老朋友欢聚一堂，感到十分高兴。首先，我谨向在座各位，并通过你们向美国人民，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！	
Good evening, everyone. Thank you, Dr. Kissinger, for your kind introduction. Dr. Kissinger has always been able to come up with some new observations. His introduction has really given me a new perspective to look at myself. It is great to be among so many friends, old and new, in the State of Washington and the City of Seattle, the first leg of my state visit to the United States. Let me begin by extending to you and, through you, to all the American people, my cordial greetings and best wishes.
我对华盛顿州和西雅图市并不陌生。人们常说，华盛顿州是“常青之州”，西雅图市是“翡翠之城”。这里有雄伟挺拔的雷尼尔山、波光潋滟的华盛顿湖。电影《西雅图不眠夜》使这座城市在中国民众中有很大吸引力。目前，华盛顿州对华出口居全美之首，中国也成为西雅图港最大贸易伙伴。华盛顿州和西雅图市成为中美人民友谊、中美互利合作的一个重要象征。	
I am no stranger to the State of Washington and the City of Seattle. Known as the Evergreen State and the Emerald City, here you have got the majestic Mt. Rainier and the charming Lake Washington. The film Sleepless in Seattle has made the city almost a household name in China. Besides, Washington is the leading state in U.S. export to China and China the number one trading partner of the Port of Seattle. Washington and Seattle have become an important symbol of the friendship between Chinese and American people and the win-win cooperation between the two countries.
众人拾柴火焰高。中美关系发展，离不开两国政府、地方、友好团体、各界人士的辛勤耕耘和精心呵护。特别是美中关系全国委员会、美中贸易全国委员会、美中政策基金会、美国商会、美国中国总商会、百人会、华美协进社、对外关系委员会、亚洲协会、布鲁金斯学会等友好团体和一大批友好人士，长期为促进两国友好合作奔走努力。中美关系持续发展，凝聚着大家的心血和汗水。在这里，我谨向所有致力于中美友好事业的地方政府、社会团体、大学和智库机构及各界人士，表示由衷的敬意和诚挚的感谢！	
As a Chinese saying goes, the fire burns high when everyone brings wood to it. It is the loving care and hard work of the national governments, local authorities, friendly organizations and people from all walks of life in both countries that have made China-U.S. relations flourish. In particular, the National Committee on U.S.-China Relations, the U.S.-China Business Council, the U.S.-China Policy Foundation, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the China General Chamber of Commerce-USA, the Committee of 100, the China Institute, the Council on Foreign Relations, the Asia Society, the Brookings Institution and many other friendly groups and individuals have made untiring efforts over the years to promote friendly relations and cooperation between the two countries and brought the relationship to this far. Let me pay high tribute and express my heartfelt gratitude to all the local governments, social organizations, universities, think tanks and people from all sectors of society who have dedicated themselves to the cause of China-U.S. friendship.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
新中国成立以来特别是改革开放以来，中国走过了一段很不平凡的历程，我们这一代中国人对此有着切身的体会。	
Since the founding of the People's Republic, especially since the beginning of reform and opening-up, China has set out on an extraordinary journey, and the Chinese of my generation have had some first-hand experience.
上世纪60年代末，我才十几岁，就从北京到中国陕西省延安市一个叫梁家河的小村庄插队当农民，在那儿度过了7年时光。那时候，我和乡亲们都住在土窑里、睡在土炕上，乡亲们生活十分贫困，经常是几个月吃不到一块肉。我了解乡亲们最需要什么！后来，我当了这个村子的党支部书记，带领乡亲们发展生产。我了解老百姓需要什么。我很期盼的一件事，就是让乡亲们饱餐一顿肉，并且经常吃上肉。但是，这个心愿在当时是很难实现的。
Towards the end of the 1960s when I was in my teens, I was sent from Beijing to work as a farmer in a small village of Liangjiahe near Yan'an of Shaanxi Province, where I spent seven years. At that time, the villagers and I lived in "earth caves" and slept on "earth beds". Life was very hard. There was no meat in our diet for months. I knew what the villagers wanted the most. Later I became the village's party secretary and began to lead the villagers m production. I understood their needs. One thing I wished most at the time was to make it possible for the villagers to have meat and have it often. But it was very difficult for such a wish to come true in those years.
今年春节，我回到这个小村子。梁家河修起了柏油路，乡亲们住上了砖瓦房，用上了互联网，老人们享有基本养老，村民们有医疗保险，孩子们可以接受良好教育，当然吃肉已经不成问题。这使我更加深刻地认识到，中国梦是人民的梦，必须同中国人民对美好生活的向往结合起来才能取得成功。	
At the Spring Festival early this year, I returned to the village. I saw blacktop roads. Now living in houses with bricks and tiles, the villagers had Internet access. Elderly folks had basic old-age care and all villagers had medical care coverage. Children were in school. Of course, meat was readily available. This made me keenly aware that the Chinese dream is after all a dream of the people. We can fulfill the Chinese dream only when we link it with our people's yearning for a better life.
梁家河这个小村庄的变化，是改革开放以来中国社会发展进步的一个缩影。我们用了30多年时间，使中国经济总量跃居世界第二，13亿多人摆脱了物质短缺，总体达到小康水平，享有前所未有的尊严和权利。这不仅是中国人民生活的巨大变化，也是人类文明的巨大进步，更是中国对世界和平与发展事业的重要贡献。	
What has happened in Liangjiahe is but a microcosm of the progress China has made through reform and opening-up. In a little more than three decades, we have turned China into the world's second largest economy, lifted l.3 billion people from a life of chronic shortage and brought them initial prosperity and unprecedented rights and dignity. This is not only a great change in the lives of the Chinese people, but also a huge step forward in human civilization and China's major contribution to world peace and development.
同时，我们也清醒认识到，中国仍然是世界上最大的发展中国家。中国的人均国内生产总值仅相当于全球平均水平的三分之二、美国的七分之一，排在世界80位左右。按照我们自己的标准，中国还有7000多万贫困人口。如果按照世界银行的标准，中国则还有两亿多人生活在贫困线以下。中国城乡有7000多万低保人口，还有8500多万残疾人。这两年，我去了中国很多贫困地区，看望了很多贫困家庭，他们渴望幸福生活的眼神深深印在我的脑海里。	
At the same time, we are soberly aware that China is still the world's largest developing country. Our per capita GDP is only two thirds that of the global average and one seventh that of the United States, ranking around 80th in the world. By China's own standard, we still have over 70 million people living under the poverty line. If measured by the World Bank standard, the number would be more than 200 million. Over 70 million citizens live on basic living allowances, and the number of people with disabilities exceeds 85 million. During the past two years, I have been to many poor areas in China and visited many poor families. I wouldn't forget the look in their eyes longing for a decent, happy life.
这些情况表明，中国人民要过上美好生活，还要继续付出艰苦努力。发展依然是当代中国的第一要务，中国执政者的首要使命就是集中力量提高人民生活水平，逐步实现共同富裕。为此，我们提出了“两个一百年”奋斗目标，就是到2020年实现国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入比2010年翻一番，全面建成小康社会；到本世纪中叶建成富强民主文明和谐的社会主义现代化国家，实现中华民族伟大复兴。我们现在所做的一切，都是为了实现这个既定目标。实现全面建成小康社会，必须全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党。这就是我们提出的“四个全面”战略布局。	
I know that we must work still harder before all our people can live a better life. That explains why development remains China's top priority. To any one charged with the governance of China, their primary mission is to focus all the resources on improving people's living standard and gradually achieve common prosperity. To this end, we have proposed the two centenary goals, i.e. to double the 2010 GDP and per capita income of the Chinese and complete the building of a moderately prosperous society by 2020 and to build a prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious modern socialist country and realize the great renewal of the Chinese nation by the middle of the century. Whatever we do now is aimed at fulfilling these goals. To succeed in completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, we must comprehensively deepen reform, advance law-based governance, and apply strict party discipline. That is what our proposed four-pronged strategy is all about.
大家都关心中国的发展走向，关心中国的政策取向，这里，我就其中一些主要的问题讲几点意见。	
Since you are all interested in such issues as the direction of China's development and China's policy orientation, let me take this opportunity to share with you some of my thoughts in this regard.
——中国经济将保持平稳较快发展。中国经济运行仍然保持在合理区间，今年上半年，中国经济增长7%，增速仍然居世界前列。在世界总体经济形势复杂多变的环境下，这是来之不易的。当前，各国经济都面临着困难，中国经济也面临着一定下行压力，但这是前进中的问题。我们将统筹稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险，加强和创新宏观调控，促进经济增长保持中高速水平。现在，中国新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化持续推进，居民储蓄率高，消费潜力巨大，人民工作勤奋，中等收入者比重在提高，服务业发展空间很大，市场空间和潜力都很大。今后，中国将更重视提高经济发展质量和效益，加快转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构，更加注重创新驱动，更加注重消费拉动，更加注重解决经济发展中存在的不平衡、不协调、不可持续问题，使中国经济凤凰涅槃、浴火重生，保持强劲发展动力。	
-- China's economy will stay on a steady course with fairly fast growth. The Chinese economy is still operating within a proper range. It grew by 7 percent in the first half of the year, and this growth rate remains one of the highest in the world. This has not come by easily given the complex and volatile situation in the world economy. At present, all economies are facing difficulties, and our economy is also under downward pressure. But this is only a problem in the course of progress. We will take coordinated steps to achieve stable growth, deepen reform, adjust structure, improve livelihood and prevent risks, while strengthening and innovating macro regulation to keep the growth at a medium-high speed. Currently, China is continuing to move forward its new type of industrialization, digitalization, urbanization and agricultural modernization. China has a high savings rate, a huge consumption potential, a hard-working population and a rising proportion of middle-income people. This creates an enormous space for the services sector and offers a big market with great potential. China will focus more on improving the quality and efficiency of economic growth and accelerating the shift of growth model and adjustment in economic structure. We will lay greater emphasis on innovation and consumption-driven growth. In this way, we will solve the problem of unbalanced, uncoordinated and unsustainable development and enable the Chinese economy to successfully transform itself and maintain strong momentum of growth.
前段时间，中国股市出现了异常波动，引起了大家关注。股市涨跌有其自身的运行规律。政府的职责是维护公开、公平、公正的市场秩序，防止发生大面积恐慌。这次，中国政府采取了一些稳定市场的措施，遏制了股市的恐慌情绪，避免了一次系统性风险。各国成熟市场也采取过类似做法。中国股市已经进入自我修复和自我调节阶段。8月11日，中国完善了人民币汇率中间价报价机制，加大了市场决定汇率的力度。目前，人民币汇率偏差矫正已初见成效。从国际国内经济金融形势看，人民币汇率不存在持续贬值的基础。我们将坚持市场供求决定汇率的改革方向，允许人民币双向浮动，我们反对搞货币竞争性贬值，反对打货币战，也不会压低人民币汇率刺激出口。发展资本市场、完善人民币汇率市场定价机制是中国的改革方向，不会因为这次股市、汇市波动而改变。	
Recent abnormal ups and downs in China's stock market has caused wide concern. Stock prices fluctuate in accordance with their inherent laws. And it is the duty of the government to ensure an open, fair and just market order and prevent massive panic from happening. This time, the Chinese government took steps to stabilize the market and contain panic in the stock market and thus avoided a systemic risk. Mature markets of various countries have tried similar approaches. Now, China's stock market has reached the phase of self-recovery and self-adjustment. On 11 August, China moved to improve its RMB central parity quotation mechanism, giving the market a greater role in determining the exchange rate. Our efforts have achieved initial success in correcting the exchange rate deviation. Given the economic and financial situation at home and abroad, there is no basis for continuous depreciation of the RMB. We will stick to the purpose of our reform to have the exchange rate decided by market supply and demand and allow the RMB to float both ways. We are against competitive depreciation or a currency war. We will not lower the RMB exchange rate to stimulate export. To develop the capital market and improve the market-based pricing mechanism of the RMB exchange rate is the direction of our reform. This will not be changed by the recent fluctuation in the stock market or the foreign exchange market.
——中国发展的根本出路在于改革。我们改革的目标，就是推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化，使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用，加快发展社会主义市场经济、民主政治、先进文化、和谐社会、生态文明。2013年，中共十八届三中全会确定了全面深化改革的顶层设计，提出330多项改革措施。2014年，我们确定的80个重点改革任务基本完成。今年上半年，我们已经出台70多项重点改革方案，其作用将逐步显现。改革关头勇者胜，我们将以敢于啃硬骨头、敢于涉险滩的决心，义无反顾推进改革。我们坚定不移坚持市场经济改革方向，将继续在市场、财税、金融、投融资、价格、对外开放、民生等领域集中推出一些力度大、措施实的改革方案。	
-- The key to China's development lies in reform. Our reform is aimed at modernizing the country's governance system and governance capabilities, so that the market can play a decisive role in the allocation of resources, the government can play a better role and there is faster progress in building the socialist market economy, democracy, advanced culture, harmonious society and sound environment. At the third Plenary Session of the 18th Party Central Committee in 2013, we decided on an overarching plan for deepening reform featuring over 330 measures. In 2014, 80 major reform items were by and large completed. In the first half of this year, we rolled out over 70 key reform programs, with their effects gradually becoming evident. When it comes to the toughest reforms, only those with courage will carry the day. We have the resolve and the guts to press ahead and take reform forward. We will stick to the direction of market economy reform and continue to introduce bold and result-oriented reform measures concerning the market, taxation, finance, investment and financing, pricing, opening-up and people's livelihood.
——中国开放的大门永远不会关上。对外开放是中国的基本国策，中国利用外资的政策不会变，对外商投资企业合法权益的保障不会变，为各国企业在华投资兴业提供更好服务的方向不会变。中国尊重非歧视性规则的国际营商惯例，遵守国民待遇等世贸组织原则，公平公正对待包括外商投资企业在内的所有市场主体，欢迎跨国公司同中国企业开展各种形式合作。我们将及时解决外国投资者合理关切，保护他们的合法权益，努力营造公开透明的法律政策环境、高效的行政环境、平等竞争的市场环境，尤其是保护好知识产权，为我们同包括美国在内的世界各国开展合作开辟更加广阔的空间。	
-- China will never close its open door to the outside world. Opening-up is a basic state policy of China. Its policies of attracting foreign investment will not change, nor will its pledge to protect the legitimate rights and interests of foreign investors in China and improve its services for foreign companies operating in China. We respect the international business norms and practices of non-discrimination, observe the WHO principle of national treatment, treat all market players including foreign-invested companies fairly, and encourage transnational corporations to engage in all forms of cooperation with Chinese companies. We will address legitimate concerns of foreign investors in a timely fashion, protect their lawful rights and interests and work hard to provide an open and transparent legal and policy environment, an efficient administrative environment and a level playing field in the market, with effective ID protection in particular, so as to broaden the space of cooperation between China and the United States and other countries.
——中国坚持依法治国的基本方略。“法者，治之端也。”全面依法治国就是要坚持依法治国、依法执政、依法行政共同推进，坚持法治国家、法治政府、法治社会一体建设，推动司法公信力不断提高、人权得到切实尊重和保障。中国在立法、执法、司法等领域将公平对待外国机构和企业。我们愿同美方就法治问题开展交流，相互借鉴，共同提高。	
-- China will follow the basic strategy of the rule of law in governance. "Law is the very foundation of governance." We will coordinate our efforts to promote the rule of law in governance and administration, put the building of the country, the government and society on the solid basis of the rule of law, build greater trust in the judicial system and ensure that human rights are respected and effectively upheld. China will give fair treatment to foreign institutions and foreign companies in the country's legislative, executive and judicial practices. We are ready to discuss rule-of-law issues with the U.S. side in the spirit of mutual learning for common progress.
中国是网络安全的坚定维护者。中国也是黑客攻击的受害国。中国政府不会以任何形式参与、鼓励或支持任何人从事窃取商业秘密行为。不论是网络商业窃密，还是对政府网络发起黑客攻击，都是违法犯罪行为，都应该根据法律和相关国际公约予以打击。国际社会应该本着相互尊重和相互信任的原则，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间。中国愿同美国建立两国共同打击网络犯罪高级别联合对话机制。	
China is a staunch defender of cybersecurity. It is also a victim of hacking. The Chinese government will not, in whatever form, engage in commercial theft or encourage or support such attempts by anyone. Both commercial cybertheft and hacking against government networks are crimes that must be punished in accordance with law and relevant international treaties. The international community should, on the basis of mutual respect and mutual trust, work together to build a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cubers. China is ready to set up a high level joint dialogue mechanism with the United States on fighting cybercrime.
中国肯定境外非营利组织的积极作用，只要这些组织的活动对中国人民有好处，我们不仅不会限制和禁止它们的活动，而且要通过法律保障它们的活动，保障它们在华合法权益。境外非营利组织在中国活动应该遵守中国法律，依法开展活动。	
China recognizes the positive role played by foreign non-profit organizations (NPO). So long as their activities are beneficial to the Chinese people, we will not restrict or prohibit their operations but will protect their operations through legislation and protect their legitimate rights and interests. On their part, foreign NPOs in China need to obey Chinese law and carry out activities in accordance with law.
——中国继续推进反腐败斗争。我说过，打铁还需自身硬。这里说的打铁的人，就是中国共产党。中国共产党的根本宗旨是全心全意为人民服务。中国共产党有8700多万名党员，党内也必然存在这样那样的问题。如果我们不能解决存在的问题，任其发展下去，人民就不会信任和支持我们。所以，我们强调治国必先治党、治党务必从严。一段时间以来，我们大力查处腐败案件，坚持“老虎”、“苍蝇”一起打，就是要顺应人民要求。这其中没有什么权力斗争，没有什么“纸牌屋”。中国愿同国际社会积极开展反腐追逃合作。中国人民希望在这方面得到美国支持和配合，让腐败分子在海外永无“避罪天堂”。	
-- China will continue fighting corruption. As I once said, one has to be very strong if he wants to strike the iron. The blacksmith referred to here is the Chinese Communist Party. The fundamental aim of the Party is to serve the people heart and soul. The Party now has over 87 million members, and unavoidably it has problems of one kind or another. If we let these problems go unchecked, we will risk losing the trust and support of the people. That is why we demand strict enforcement of party discipline as the top priority of governance. In our vigorous campaign against corruption, we have punished both "tigers" and "flies", corrupt officials irrespective of ranking, in response to our people's demand. This has nothing to do with power struggle. It's nothing like what you see in House of Cards. China is ready to cooperate closely with international community in fighting corruption and tracking down fugitives. The Chinese people look to the U.S. for support and coordination so that corrupt elements will be denied an overseas "safe haven".
——中国坚持走和平发展道路。我们刚刚纪念了中国人民抗日战争胜利暨世界反法西斯战争胜利7O周年，历史给我们的一个重要启迪就是，和平发展是人间正道，一切通过武力侵略谋取强权和霸权的企图都是逆历史潮流的，都是要失败的。中国人2000多年前就认识到了“国虽大，好战必亡”的真理。中国历来奉行防御性国防政策和积极防御的军事战略。我愿在此重申，无论发展到哪一步，中国永远不称霸、永远不搞扩张。为表明中国坚持和平发展的决心，我不久前宣布中国将裁军30万。我们愿同各国一道，构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，以合作取代对抗，以共赢取代独占，树立建设伙伴关系新思路，开创共同发展新前景，营造共享安全新局面。	
-- China will keep to the path of peaceful development. We have just commemorated the 70th anniversary of the victory of the Chinese People's War of Resistance against Japanese Aggression and the World Anti-Fascist War. An important lesson history teaches us is that peaceful development is the right path, while any attempt to seek domination or hegemony through force is against the historical tide and doomed to failure. The Chinese recognized as early as 2,000 years ago that "though a country is now strong, bellicosity will lead to its ruin." China's defense policy is defensive in nature and its military strategy features active defense. Let me reiterate here that no matter how developed it could become, China will never seek hegemony or engage in expansion. To demonstrate our commitment to peaceful development, I announced not long ago that the size of China's military will be cut by 300,000. China is ready to work with other countries to build a new type of international relations with win-win cooperation at its core, replacing confrontation and domination with win-win cooperation, and adopting a new thinking of building partnerships, so as to jointly open up a new vista of common development and shared security.
中国是现行国际体系的参与者、建设者、贡献者。我们坚决维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序和国际体系。世界上很多国家特别是广大发展中国家都希望国际体系朝着更加公正合理方向发展，但这并不是推倒重来，也不是另起炉灶，而是与时俱进、改革完善。这符合世界各国和全人类共同利益。	
As far as the existing international system is concerned, China has been a participant, builder and contributor. We stand firmly for the international order and system that is based on the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. A great number of countries, especially developing countries, want to see a more just and equitable international system, but it doesn't mean they want to unravel the entire system or start all over again. Rather, what they want is to reform and improve the system to keep up with the times. This would serve the common interests of all countries and mankind as a whole.
中国发展得益于国际社会，中国也要为全球发展作出贡献。我们推动共建“一带一路”、设立丝路基金、倡议成立亚洲基础设施投资银行等，目的是支持各国共同发展，而不是要谋求政治势力范围。“一带一路”是开放包容的，我们欢迎包括美国在内的世界各国和国际组织参与到合作中来。我们积极推动亚太区域经济一体化进程，推动实现亚太自由贸易区目标，是要推动形成自由开放、方便快捷、充满活力的亚太发展空间。我们倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，是要同地区各国以及国际社会一道，维护好亚太和平和安全。	
China has benefited from the international community in development, and China in turn has made its contribution to global development. Our "Belt and Road" initiative, our establishment of the Silk Road Fund and our proposal to set up the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) are all aimed at helping the common development of all countries rather than seeking some kind of spheres of political influence. The "Belt and Road" initiative is open and inclusive. We welcome participation of the U.S. and other countries and international organizations. We have vigorously promoted economic integration in the Asia Pacific and the Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific in particular, because we want to facilitate the shaping of a free, open, convenient and dynamic space for development in the Asia Pacific. We call for an outlook of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, because we want to work with other countries in the region and the rest of the international community to maintain peace and security in the Asia Pacific.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
2013年，我同奥巴马总统在安纳伯格庄园会晤，达成共同努力构建中美新型大国关系的重要共识。这是双方在总结历史经验基础上，从两国国情和世界大势出发，共同作出的重大战略抉择。	
In our Sunnylands meeting in 2013, President Obama and I reached the important agreement to jointly build a new model of major-country relationship between the two countries. This was a major, strategic choice we made together on the basis of historical experience, our respective national conditions and the prevailing trend of the world.
两年多来，双方按照达成的共识，不断推进各领域协调和合作，取得重要进展。我们携手应对国际金融危机影响，为推动世界经济复苏作出共同努力。我们深化各领域务实交流合作，给两国人民带来实实在在的利益。去年，两国双边贸易额、双向投资存量、人员往来总数都创历史新高。我们围绕伊朗核、朝核、南苏丹、阿富汗、中东等国际和地区热点问题，以及抗击埃博拉病毒、打击恐怖主义等全球性问题保持密切沟通和协调。“桃李不言，下自成蹊。”这些成果丰硕的“跨越太平洋的合作”，有力展现了中美关系发展的蓬勃生机和巨大潜力。	
Over the past two years and more, the two sides have acted in accordance with the agreement, steadily moved forward bilateral coordination and cooperation in various fields and made important progress.We worked hand in hand to cope with the aftermath of the international financial crisis and promoted global economic recovery. We deepened pragmatic exchanges and cooperation in all fields which brought about tangible benefits to the two peoples. Last year, bilateral trade, two-way investment stock and total number of personnel exchanges all hit a record high. We maintained close communication and coordination on such international and regional hotspot issues as the Iranian nuclear issue, the Korean nuclear issue, South Sudan, Afghanistan, the Middle East as well as such global issues as fighting against Ebola and countering terrorism. As an old Chinese saying goes, "Peaches and plums do not talk, yet a path is formed beneath them." These worthy fruits of cooperation across the Pacific Ocean speaks eloquently to the vitality and potential of China-U.S. relations.
如何在新起点上推进中美新型大国关系？中美应该怎样携手合作来促进世界和平与发展？答案就是要坚持构建中美新型大国关系的正确方向，一步一个脚印向前走。中国古人说：“度之往事，验之来事，参之平素，可则决之。”这其中，有几件事尤其要做好。	
This leads to the question: what shall we do to advance the new model of major country relationship between China and the U.S. from a new starting point and how can we work together to promote world peace and development? The answer, in my view, is to stick to the right direction of such a new model of relationship and make gradual yet solid progress. An ancient Chinese said, "A decision can be properly made after taking into account the past, the future and the normal practices." A number of things are particularly important for our efforts.
第一，正确判断彼此战略意图。同美方一道构建新型大国关系，实现双方不冲突不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢，是中国外交政策优先方向。我们愿同美方加深对彼此战略走向、发展道路的了解，多一些理解、少一些隔阂，多一些信任、少一些猜忌，防止战略误解误判。我们要坚持以事实为依据，防止三人成虎，也不疑邻盗斧，不能戴着有色眼镜观察对方。世界上本无“修昔底德陷阱”，但大国之间一再发生战略误判，就可能自己给自己造成“修昔底德陷阱”。	
First, we must read each other's strategic intentions correctly.Building a new model of major-country relationship with the United States that features non-conflict, non-confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation is the priority of China's foreign policy. We want to deepen mutual understanding with the U.S. on each other's strategic orientation and development path. We want to see more understanding and trust, less estrangement and suspicion, in order to forestall misunderstanding and miscalculation. We should strictly base our judgment on facts, lest we become victims to hearsay, paranoid or self-imposed bias. There is no such thing as the so-called Thucydides trap in the world. But should major countries time and again make the mistakes of strategic miscalculation, they might create such traps for themselves.
第二，坚定不移推进合作共赢。合作是实现利益唯一正确选择。要合作就要照顾彼此利益和关切，寻求合作最大公约数。中美两国合作好了，可以成为世界稳定的压舱石、世界和平的助推器。中美冲突和对抗，对两国和世界肯定是灾难。中美应该和能够合作的领域十分广阔。我们应该推动完善全球治理机制，共同促进世界经济稳定增长，共同维护全球金融市场稳定。我们应该早日谈成一个双向平衡、高水平的双边投资协定，深化中美新型军事关系建设，拓展在清洁能源、环保等领域务实合作，加强在执法和反腐败、卫生、地方等领域交流合作，挖掘在基础设施建设方面的合作潜力。我们应该深化在联合国、亚太经合组织、二十国集团等多边机制以及重大国际和地区问题、全球性挑战上的沟通和合作，为维护和促进世界和平、稳定、繁荣作出更大贡献。	
Second, we must firmly advance win-win cooperation. Cooperation is the only right choice to bring about benefits. But cooperation requires mutual accommodation of each other's interests and concerns and the quest of the greatest common ground of converging interests. If China and the United States cooperate well, they can become a bedrock of global stability and a booster of world peace. Should they enter into conflict or confrontation, it would lead to disaster for both countries and the world at large. The areas where we should, and can, cooperate are very broad. For instance, we should help improve the global governance mechanism and work together to promote a sustained growth of world economy and maintain stability in the global financial market. We should conclude as soon as possible a balanced and high-quality bilateral investment treaty (BIT), deepen the building of a new type of mil-to-mil relations between the two countries, expand pragmatic cooperation on clean energy and environmental protection, strengthen exchanges on law enforcement, anti-corruption, health and local affairs and tap the cooperation potential in infrastructural development. We should deepen communication and cooperation at the United Nations, APEC, G20 and other multilateral mechanisms as well as on major international and regional issues and global challenges, so as to make a bigger contribution to world peace, stability and prosperity.
第三，妥善有效管控分歧。“日月不同光，昼夜各有宜。”正是因为有了差别，世界才多姿多彩；也正是因为有了分歧，才需要聚同化异。矛盾是普遍存在的，纯而又纯的世界是不存在的。中美两国在一些问题上存在不同看法、存在分歧在所难免，关键是如何管控。最关键的是双方应该相互尊重、求同存异，采取建设性方式增进理解、扩大共识，努力把矛盾点转化为合作点。	
Third, we must manage our differences properly and effectively. As a Chinese saying goes, "The sun and the moon shine in different ways, yet their brightness is just right for the day and the night respectively." It is precisely because of so many differences that the world has become such a diverse and colorful place, and that the need to broaden common ground and iron out differences has become so important. A perfectly pure world is non-existent since disagreements are a reality people have to live with. China and the United States do not see eye to eye on every issue, and it is unavoidable that we may have different positions on some of the issues. What matters is how to manage the differences. And what matters most is that the two sides should respect each other, seek common ground while reserving differences, take a constructive approach to enhance understanding and expand consensus and spare no effort to turn differences into areas of cooperation.
第四，广泛培植人民友谊。国家关系归根结底是人民之间的关系。中美两国虽然相距遥远，但两国人民友好交往源远流长。230多年前，美国商船“中国皇后号”跨洋过海首航中国。150年前，数以万计的中国工人同美国人民一起，铺设了横贯东西的美国太平洋铁路。70年前，中美作为第二次世界大战盟国并肩奋战，共同捍卫了世界和平和正义。在那场战争中，数以千计的美国将士为中国人民的正义事业献出了宝贵生命。我们不会忘记美国人民为中国人民抗击侵略、赢得自由和独立给予的道义支持和宝贵援助。	
Fourth, we must foster friendly sentiments among our peoples. People-to-people relations underpin state-to-state relations. Though geographically far apart, our peoples boast a long history of friendly exchanges. Some 230 years ago, Empress of China, a U.S. merchant ship, sailed across vast oceans to the shores of China. Some 150 years ago, tens of thousands of Chinese workers joined their American counterparts in building the trans-continental Pacific Railway. Some 70 years ago, China and the United States, as allies in World War II, fought shoulder to shoulder, to defend world peace and justice. In that war, thousands of American soldiers laid down their precious lives for the just cause of the Chinese people. We will never forget the moral support and invaluable assistance the American people gave to our just resistance against aggression and our struggle for freedom and independence.
中国人民一向钦佩美国人民的进取精神和创造精神。我青年时代就读过《联邦党人文集》、托马斯·潘恩的《常识》等著作，也喜欢了解华盛顿、林肯、罗斯福等美国政治家的生平和思想，我还读过梭罗、惠特曼、马克·吐温、杰克·伦敦等人的作品。海明威《老人与海》对狂风和暴雨、巨浪和小船、老人和鲨鱼的描写给我留下了深刻印象。我第一次去古巴，专程去了海明威当年写《老人与海》的栈桥边。第二次去古巴，我去了海明威经常去的酒吧，点了海明威爱喝的朗姆酒配薄荷叶加冰块。我想体验一下当年海明威写下那些故事时的精神世界和实地氛围。我认为，对不同的文化和文明，我们需要去深入了解。	
The Chinese people have always held American entrepreneurship and creativity in high regards. In my younger years, I read the Federalist Papers and Thomas Paine's Common Sense. I was interested in the life story and thinking of George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, Franklin Roosevelt and other American statesmen. I also read works of Henry David Thoreau, Walt Whitman, Mark Twain and Jack London. I was most captivated by Ernest Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea and its descriptions of howling wind, driving rain, roaring waves, small boat, the old man and sharks. So when I visited Cuba for the first time, I paid a special visit to the breakwater in Cojimar where Hemingway wrote the book. And in my second visit of Cuba, I dropped by the bar Hemingway frequented and ordered a mojito, his favorite rum with mint leaves and ice. I just wanted to feel for myself what was on his mind and what the place was like as he wrote those stories. I believe that it is always important to make an effort to get a deep understanding of the cultures and civilizations that are different from our own.
在汉字中，“人”字就是一个相互支撑的形状。中美友好，根基在民众，希望在青年。我愿在此宣布，中方支持未来3年中美两国互派5万名留学生到对方国家学习，中美将在2016年举办“中美旅游年”。中国将为两国人民友好交往创造更多便利条件。	
The Chinese character Ren or people is in a shape of two strokes supporting each other. The foundation of China-U.S. friendship has its roots in the people, and its future rests with the youth. I wish to announce here that China supports the initiative of sending a total of 50,000 Chinese and American students to study in each other's countries over the next three years. China and the U.S. will launch a China-U.S. Year of Tourism in 2016. China on its part will create more favorable conditions for closer people-to-people exchanges.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
基辛格博士在其著作《世界秩序》中说：“评判每一代人时，要看他们是否正视了人类社会最宏大和最重要的问题。”马丁·路德·金先生也说过：“做对的事，任何时机都是好时机。”今天，我们再次来到了关键的历史当口。让我们携起手来，共同开创中美关系更加美好的未来，为中美两国人民幸福、为世界各国人民幸福作出更大贡献！	
Dr. Kissinger wrote in his book World Order and I quote, that "each generation will be judged by whether the greatest, most consequential issues of the human condition have been faced." And Martin Luther King said, "The time is always right to do the right thing." Today, we have come once again to a historical juncture. Let us work together to bring about an even better future for China-U.S. relations and make an even greater contribution to the happiness of our two peoples and the well-being of the people the world over.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
119. 习近平在博鳌亚洲论坛开幕式上的演讲
Towards a Community of Common Destiny and A New Future for Asia
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2015
Boao, 28 March 2015
迈向命运共同体 开创亚洲新未来
——在博鳌亚洲论坛2015年年会上的主旨演讲
（2015年3月28日，海南博鳌）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
尊敬的各位元首，各位政府首脑，
Ministers,
各位部长，
Heads of International and Regional Organizations,
各位国际和地区组织负责人，
Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia,
尊敬的博鳌亚洲论坛理事会各位成员，
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Boao today greets us with vast ocean, high sky and warm breeze. In this beautiful season of spring, it is of great significance that so many distinguished guests gather here to discuss the development strategies for Asia and the world.
今天的博鳌，海阔帆舞，天高风暖。在这个美好的季节里，各方嘉宾相聚一堂，共商亚洲和亚洲同世界各地区发展大计，具有十分重要的意义。
At the outset, let me extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, heartfelt welcome to all the distinguished guests attending the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2015, and my warm congratulations on the opening of the conference.
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾出席博鳌亚洲论坛2015年年会，表示诚挚的欢迎！对年会的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！
The theme of this year's conference is "Asia's New Future: Towards a Community of Common Destiny". The timing could not be better in that the theme has not only great immediate relevance but also long-term historical significance. And I am looking to all of you to express yourselves fully and contribute your insightful views to the cause of peace and development of Asia and beyond.
本届博鳌亚洲论坛年会以“亚洲新未来：迈向命运共同体”为主题，可谓恰逢其时，既有重要的现实意义，也有长远的历史意义。希望大家畅所欲言，为亚洲和世界和平与发展贡献真知灼见。
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
There are certain historic occasions that are likely to remind people of what happened in the past and set people reflecting on them. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the World Anti-Fascist War, the victory of the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and the founding of the United Nations. This year is also the 60th anniversary of the Bandung Conference and will witness the completion of the ASEAN Community. As such, it is an important year to be commemorated as well as a historic juncture to reflect on the past and look to the future.
历史，总是在一些重要时间节点上更能勾起人们的回忆和反思。今年是世界反法西斯战争暨中国人民抗日战争胜利70周年，联合国成立70周年，万隆会议召开60周年，东盟共同体建成之年。这是值得人们纪念的重要年份，也是激发人们铭记历史、鉴往知来的重要时刻。
Over the past 70 years, the world has experienced profound changes as never before, making a difference to the destiny of mankind. With the days of global colonialism and the Cold War long gone, countries are now increasingly interconnected and interdependent. Peace, development and win-win cooperation have become the prevailing trend of our times. The international forces are shifting in a way that is more favorable to maintaining world peace. Countries are now in a better position to uphold general stability in the world and seek common development.
70年来，世界发生了前所未有的深刻变化，历史性地改变了人类的命运。全球殖民体系土崩瓦解，冷战对峙不复存在，各国相互联系、相互依存日益加深，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流滚滚向前，国际力量对比朝着有利于维护世界和平的方向发展，保持国际形势总体稳定、促进各国共同发展具备更多有利条件。
Over the past 70 years, Asia has also gone through unprecedented changes. After gaining national independence, Asian countries took their destiny in their own hands and strengthened the force for regional and world peace. Asian countries were the first to advocate the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence and, together with African countries, put forward the Ten Principles on handling state-to-state relations at the Bandung Conference. Since the end of the Cold War, Asian countries have gradually come up with an Asian way of cooperation in the course of advancing regional cooperation, which features mutual respect, consensus-building and accommodation of each other's comfort levels. All this has contributed to a proper approach to state-to-state relations and to progress in building a new type of international relations.
70年来，亚洲形势也发生了前所未有的变化。地区各国实现了民族独立、掌握了自己的命运，壮大了维护地区和世界和平的力量。亚洲国家率先倡导和平共处五项原则，并同非洲国家一道，在万隆会议上提出处理国家间关系的十项原则。冷战结束后，亚洲国家在推进区域合作实践中逐步形成相互尊重、协商一致、照顾各方舒适度的亚洲方式。这些都为正确处理国家关系、推动建立新型国际关系作出了历史性贡献。
Over the past 70 years, more and more Asian countries have found development paths that suit their own national conditions and embarked on a fast-track of economic growth. Having emerged from poverty and backwardness, they are on course to achieve development and prosperity. Regional and inter-regional cooperation is flourishing. Connectivity is pursued at a faster pace. As a result, there is a strong momentum in Asia with countries striving to outperform each other. Accounting for one third of the world economy, Asia is one of the most dynamic regions with the most potential and its global strategic importance has been rising.
70年来，越来越多的亚洲国家找到适合本国国情的发展道路，从贫穷落后走向发展振兴，步入经济发展快车道。区域和跨区域合作方兴未艾，互联互通建设加速推进，呈现千帆竞发、百舸争流的强劲势头。亚洲已经拥有世界三分之一的经济总量，是当今世界最具发展活力和潜力的地区之一，在世界战略全局中的地位进一步上升。
Over the past 70 years, Asian countries have gradually transcended their differences in ideology and social system. No longer cut off from each other, they are now open and inclusive, with suspicion and estrangement giving way to growing trust and appreciation. The interests of Asian countries have become intertwined, and a community of common destiny has increasingly taken shape. Be it the arduous struggle for national independence, or the difficult periods of the Asian financial crisis and the international financial crisis, or the hard time in the wake of devastating disasters including the Indian Ocean tsunami and earthquake in Wenchuan, China, the people of Asian countries have always come to those in need with a helping hand and worked together to overcome one challenge after another, demonstrating the power of unity in face of difficulties and the spirit of sharing weal and woe. This said, Asia still faces numerous challenges. Some are the old issues left over from history and others are new ones associated with current disputes. Asia is also confronted with various traditional and non-traditional security threats. Hence it remains an uphill battle for Asian countries to grow the economy, improve people's livelihood and eliminate poverty.
70年来，亚洲国家逐步超越意识形态和社会制度差异，从相互封闭到开放包容，从猜忌隔阂到日益增多的互信认同，越来越成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。在争取民族独立的伟大斗争中，在应对亚洲金融危机和国际金融危机的艰难时刻，在抗击印度洋海啸和中国汶川特大地震等灾害的紧要关头，亚洲各国人民守望相助，克服和战胜了一个又一个困难和挑战，展现出同舟共济、共克时艰的强大力量，正可谓患难见真情。同时，亚洲地区仍然存在一些历史遗留问题和现实矛盾分歧，面临各类传统和非传统安全威胁，地区国家发展经济、改善民生、消除贫困的任务依然艰巨。
A review of the path traversed over the past 70 years shows that what has been accomplished in Asia today is attributable to the persistent efforts of several generations of people in Asian countries and to the hard work of many statesmen and people of great vision. Tomorrow, Singapore will hold a state funeral for Mr. Lee Kuan Yew. Mr. Lee was a strategist and statesman respected across the world for his outstanding contribution to the peace and development of Asia and the exchanges and cooperation between Asia and the world. I want to take this opportunity to pay high tribute to Mr. Lee Kuan Yew and all those who made contribution to Asia's peace and development.
回顾70年的历程，今天亚洲取得的发展成就，是亚洲各国人民一代接一代持续奋斗的结果，是许多政治家和仁人志士艰辛努力的结果。明天，新加坡将为李光耀先生举行国葬。李光耀先生是受到国际社会尊重的战略家和政治家，为亚洲和平与发展以及亚洲同世界的交流合作作出了突出贡献。借此机会，我向包括李光耀先生在内的所有为亚洲和平发展作出贡献的先贤们，致以崇高的敬意。
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Asia belongs to the world. For Asia to move towards a community of common destiny and embrace a new future, it has to follow the world trend and seek progress and development in tandem with that of the world.
亚洲是世界的亚洲。亚洲要迈向命运共同体、开创亚洲新未来，必须在世界前进的步伐中前进、在世界发展的潮流中发展。
The international situation continues to experience profound and complex changes, with significant development in multipolarization and economic globalization. Cultural diversity and IT application are making constant progress while readjustment is accelerating in international landscape and order. Countries around the world are losing no time in adjusting their development strategies, pursuing transformation and innovation, changing their economic development models, improving economic structures and opening up new horizons for further development. At the same time, however, the world economy is still in a period of profound adjustment, with risks of low growth, low inflation and low demand interwoven with risks of high unemployment, high debt and high level of bubbles. The performance and policies of major economies continue to diverge, and uncertainties in the economic climate remain prominent. Geopolitical factors are more at play and local turmoils keep cropping up. Non-traditional security threats and global challenges including terrorism, cyber security, energy security, food security, climate change and major infectious diseases are on the rise, and the North-South gap is still wide. The noble cause of peace and development remains a long and arduous journey for mankind.
当前，国际形势继续发生深刻复杂变化，世界多极化、经济全球化深入发展，文化多样化、社会信息化持续推进，国际格局和国际秩序加速调整演变。世界各国正抓紧调整各自发展战略，推动变革创新，转变经济发展方式，调整经济结构，开拓新的发展空间。同时，世界经济仍处于深度调整期，低增长、低通胀、低需求同高失业、高债务、高泡沫等风险交织，主要经济体走势和政策取向继续分化，经济环境的不确定性依然突出；地缘政治因素更加突出，局部动荡此起彼伏；恐怖主义、网络安全、能源安全、粮食安全、气候变化、重大传染性疾病等非传统安全和全球性挑战不断增多，南北发展差距依然很大。推进人类和平与发展的崇高事业依然任重而道远。
We have only one planet, and countries share one world. To do well, Asia and the world could not do without each other. Facing the fast changing international and regional landscapes, we must see the whole picture, follow the trend of our times and jointly build a regional order that is more favorable to Asia and the world. We should, through efforts towards such a community for Asia, promote a community of common interest for all mankind. I wish to take this opportunity to share with you my thoughts on this vision.
人类只有一个地球，各国共处一个世界。世界好，亚洲才能好；亚洲好，世界才能好。面对风云变幻的国际和地区形势，我们要把握世界大势，跟上时代潮流，共同营造对亚洲、对世界都更为有利的地区秩序，通过迈向亚洲命运共同体，推动建设人类命运共同体。借此机会，我愿就此谈一谈看法，同各位嘉宾交流。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to make sure that all countries respect one another and treat each other as equals. Countries may differ in size, strength or level of development, but they are all equal members of the international community with equal rights to participate in regional and international affairs. On matters that involve us all, we should discuss and look for a solution together. Being a big country means shouldering greater responsibilities for regional and world peace and development, as opposed to seeking greater monopoly over regional and world affairs.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持各国相互尊重、平等相待。各国体量有大小、国力有强弱、发展有先后，但都是国际社会平等一员，都有平等参与地区和国际事务的权利。涉及大家的事情要由各国共同商量来办。作为大国，意味着对地区和世界和平与发展的更大责任，而不是对地区和国际事务的更大垄断。
To respect one another and treat each other as equals, countries need to, first and foremost, respect other countries' social systems and development paths of their own choice, respect each other's core interests and major concerns and have objective and rational perception of other countries' growing strength, policies and visions. Efforts should be made to seek common ground while shelving differences, and better still to increase common interests and dissolve differences. The hard-won peace and stability in Asia and the sound momentum for development should be upheld by all. All of us must oppose interference in other countries' internal affairs and reject attempts to destablize the region out of selfish motives.
相互尊重、平等相待，首先要尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，客观理性看待别国发展壮大和政策理念，努力求同存异、聚同化异。要共同维护亚洲来之不易的和平稳定局面和良好发展势头，反对干涉别国内政，反对为一己之私搞乱地区形势。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to seek win-win cooperation and common development. Our friends in Southeast Asia say that the lotus flowers grow taller as the water rises. Our friends in Africa say that if you want to go fast, walk alone; and if you want to go far, walk together. Our friends in Europe say that a single tree cannot block the chilly wind. And Chinese people say that when big rivers have water, the small ones are filled; and when small rivers have water, the big ones are filled. All these sayings speak to one same truth, that is, only through win-win cooperation can we make big and sustainable achievements that are beneficial to all. The old mindset of zero-sum game should give way to a new approach of win-win and all-win cooperation. The interests of others must be accommodated while pursuing one's own interests, and common development must be promoted while seeking one's own development. The vision of win-win cooperation not only applies to the economic field, but also to the political, security, cultural and many other fields. It not only applies to countries within the region, but also to cooperation with countries from outside the region. We should enhance coordination of macroeconomic policies to prevent negative spill-over effects that may arise from economic policy changes in individual economies. We should actively promote reform of global economic governance, uphold an open world economy, and jointly respond to risks and challenges in the world economy.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持合作共赢、共同发展。东南亚朋友讲“水涨荷花高”，非洲朋友讲“独行快，众行远”，欧洲朋友讲“一棵树挡不住寒风”，中国人讲“大河有水小河满，小河有水大河满”。这些说的都是一个道理，只有合作共赢才能办大事、办好事、办长久之事。要摒弃零和游戏、你输我赢的旧思维，树立双赢、共赢的新理念，在追求自身利益时兼顾他方利益，在寻求自身发展时促进共同发展。合作共赢的理念不仅适用于经济领域，也适用于政治、安全、文化等广泛领域；不仅适用于地区国家之间，也适用于同域外国家开展合作。要加强宏观经济政策协调，防范不同经济体经济政策变动可能带来的负面外溢效应，积极推动全球经济治理变革，维护开放型世界经济体制，共同应对世界经济中的风险和挑战。
China and ASEAN countries will join hands in building an even closer China-ASEAN community of common destiny. The building of an East Asia economic community for ASEAN, China, Japan and ROK will be completed in 2020. We should actively build a free trade cooperation network in Asia and strive to conclude negotiations on an upgraded China-ASEAN FTA and on Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) in 2015. In advancing economic integration in Asia, we need to stay committed to open regionalism and move forward trans-regional cooperation, including APEC, in a coordinated manner.
中国和东盟国家携手建设更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体，东盟和中国、日本、韩国致力于2020年建成东亚经济共同体。我们要积极构建亚洲自由贸易网络，争取在2015年完成中国－东盟自由贸易区升级谈判和区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判。在推进亚洲经济一体化的同时，我们要坚持开放的区域主义，协调推进包括亚太经合组织在内的跨区域合作。
We will vigorously promote a system of regional financial cooperation, explore a platform for exchanges and cooperation among Asian financial institutions, and advance complementary and coordinated development between the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and such multilateral financial institutions as the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank. We will strengthen practical cooperation in currency stability, investment and financing, and credit rating, make progress in institution building for the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization and build a regional financial security network. We will work towards an energy and resources cooperation mechanism in Asia to ensure energy and resources security.
我们要积极推动构建地区金融合作体系，探讨搭建亚洲金融机构交流合作平台，推动亚洲基础设施投资银行同亚洲开发银行、世界银行等多边金融机构互补共进、协调发展。要加强在货币稳定、投融资、信用评级等领域务实合作，推进清迈倡议多边化机制建设，建设地区金融安全网。要推动建设亚洲能源资源合作机制，保障能源资源安全。
China proposes that plans be formulated regarding connectivity building in East Asia and Asia at large to advance full integration in infrastructure, policies and institutions and personnel flow. We may increase maritime connectivity, speed up institution building for marine cooperation in Asia, and step up cooperation in marine economy, environmental protection, disaster management and fishery. This way, we could turn the seas of Asia into seas of peace, friendship and cooperation for Asian countries.
中方倡议加快制定东亚和亚洲互联互通规划，促进基础设施、政策规制、人员往来全面融合。要加强海上互联互通建设，推进亚洲海洋合作机制建设，促进海洋经济、环保、灾害管理、渔业等各领域合作，使海洋成为连接亚洲国家的和平、友好、合作之海。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. In today's world, security means much more than before and its implications go well beyond a single region or time frame. All sorts of factors could have a bearing on a country's security. As people of all countries share common destiny and become increasingly interdependent, no country could have its own security ensured without the security of other countries or of the wider world. The Cold War mentality should truly be discarded and new security concepts be nurtured as we explore a path for Asia that ensures security for all, by all and of all.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持实现共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全。当今世界，安全的内涵和外延更加丰富，时空领域更加宽广，各种因素更加错综复杂。各国人民命运与共、唇齿相依。当今世界，没有一个国家能实现脱离世界安全的自身安全，也没有建立在其他国家不安全基础上的安全。我们要摒弃冷战思维，创新安全理念，努力走出一条共建、共享、共赢的亚洲安全之路。
We believe that countries are all entitled to take an equal part in regional security affairs and all are obliged to work to ensure security for the region. The legitimate security concerns of each country need to be respected and addressed. At the same time, in handling security issues in Asia, it is important to bear in mind both the history and reality of Asia, take a multi-pronged and holistic approach, improve coordinated regional security governance, and safeguard security in both the traditional and non-traditional realms. It is important to conduct dialogue and cooperation to enhance security at national and regional levels, and to increase cooperation as the way to safeguard peace and security. It is important to resolve disputes through peaceful means, and oppose the willful use or threat of force. Security should be given equal emphasis as development, and sustainable development surely provides a way to sustainable security. Countries in Asia need to step up cooperation with countries and organizations outside the region and all parties are welcome to play a positive and constructive role in upholding development and security in Asia.
各国都有平等参与地区安全事务的权利，也都有维护地区安全的责任，每一个国家的合理安全关切都应该得到尊重和保障。要通盘考虑亚洲安全问题的历史经纬和现实状况，多管齐下、综合施策，协调推进地区安全治理，统筹维护传统和非传统领域安全。要通过对话合作促进各国和本地区安全，以合作谋和平、以合作促安全，坚持以和平方式解决争端，反对动辄使用武力或以武力相威胁。要坚持发展和安全并重，以可持续发展促进可持续安全。亚洲国家要加强同其他地区国家和有关组织合作，欢迎各方为亚洲发展和安全发挥积极和建设性作用。
-- To build a community of common destiny, we need to ensure inclusiveness and mutual learning among civilizations. History, over the past millennia, has witnessed ancient civilizations appear and thrive along the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers, the Indus, the Ganges, the Euphrates, and the Tigris River as well as in Southeast Asia, each adding its own splendour to the progress of human civilization. Today, Asia has proudly maintained its distinct diversity and still nurtures all the civilizations, ethnic groups and religions in this big Asian family.
——迈向命运共同体，必须坚持不同文明兼容并蓄、交流互鉴。在漫长历史长河中，如亚洲的黄河和长江流域、印度河和恒河流域、幼发拉底河和底格里斯河流域以及东南亚等地区孕育了众多古老文明，彼此交相辉映、相得益彰，为人类文明进步作出了重要贡献。今天的亚洲，多样性的特点仍十分突出，不同文明、不同民族、不同宗教汇聚交融，共同组成多彩多姿的亚洲大家庭。
Mencius, the great philosopher in ancient China, said, "Things are born to be different." Civilizations are only unique, and no one is superior to the other. There need to be more exchange and dialogue among civilizations and development models, so that each could draw on the strength of the other and all could thrive and prosper by way of mutual learning and common development. Let us promote inter-civilization exchanges to build bridges of friendship for our people, drive human development and safeguard peace of the world.
中国古代思想家孟子说过：“夫物之不齐，物之情也。”不同文明没有优劣之分，只有特色之别。要促进不同文明不同发展模式交流对话，在竞争比较中取长补短，在交流互鉴中共同发展，让文明交流互鉴成为增进各国人民友谊的桥梁、推动人类社会进步的动力、维护世界和平的纽带。
China proposes that a conference of dialogue among Asian civilizations be held to provide a platform upon which to enhance interactions among the youth, people's groups, local communities and the media and to form a network of think-tank cooperation, so as to add to Asian people's rich cultural life and contribute to more vibrant regional cooperation and development.
中方倡议召开亚洲文明对话大会，加强青少年、民间团体、地方、媒体等各界交流，打造智库交流合作网络，让亚洲人民享受更富内涵的精神生活，让地区发展合作更加活力四射。
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Right now, the Chinese people are working in unison under the strategic plans to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and to comprehensively deepen reform, advance law-based governance, and enforce strict Party conduct. Our objective is to realize the "two centenary" goals for China's development and for realizing the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. I wish to use this opportunity to reaffirm China's commitment to the path of peaceful development, and to promoting cooperation and common development in the Asia-Pacific. China will be firm in its determination and resolve and all its policies will be designed to achieve such a purpose.
中国人民正在按照全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党的战略布局，齐心协力为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。借此机会，我愿重申，在前进道路上，中国坚持和平发展，决心不会动摇；坚持共同发展，理念不会动摇；坚持亚太合作发展，政策不会动摇。
Now, the Chinese economy has entered a state of new normal. It is shifting gear from high speed to medium-to-high speed growth, from an extensive model that emphasized scale and speed to a more intensive one emphasizing quality and efficiency, and from being driven by investment in production factors to being driven by innovation. China's economy grew by 7.4% in 2014, with 7% increase in labor productivity and 4.8% decrease in energy intensity. The share of domestic consumption in GDP rose, the services sector expanded at a faster pace, and the economy's efficiency and quality continued to improve. When looking at China's economy, one should not focus on growth rate only. As the economy continues to grow in size, around 7% growth would be quite impressive, and the momentum it generates would be larger than growth at double digits in previous years. It is fair to say that the Chinese economy is highly resilient and has much potential, which gives us enough room to leverage a host of policy tools. Having said that, China will continue to be responsive to the new trend and take initiatives to shape the new normal in our favor. We will focus on improving quality and efficiency, and give even greater priority to shifting the growth model and adjusting the structure of development. We will make more solid efforts to boost economic development and deepen reform and opening-up. We will take more initiatives to unleash the creativity and ingenuity of the people, be more effective in safeguarding equity and social justice, raise people's living standards and make sure that China's economic and social development are both sound and stable.
中国经济发展进入新常态，正从高速增长转为中高速增长，从规模速度型粗放增长转向质量效率型集约增长，从要素投资驱动转向创新驱动。2014年，中国经济实现了7.4%的增长，劳动生产率提高了7%，单位国内生产总值能耗下降了4.8%，国内消费贡献度上升，服务业发展加快，发展质量和效益不断提高。我们看中国经济，不能只看增长率，中国经济体量不断增大，现在增长7%左右的经济增量已相当可观，集聚的动能是过去两位数的增长都达不到的。中国经济体量大、韧性好、潜力足、回旋空间大、政策工具多。中国将主动适应和引领经济发展新常态，坚持以提高经济发展质量和效益为中心，把转方式调结构放到更加重要位置，更加扎实地推进经济发展，更加坚定地深化改革开放，更加充分地激发创造活力，更加有效地维护公平正义，更加有力地保障和改善民生，促进经济社会平稳健康发展。
This new normal of the Chinese economy will continue to bring more opportunities of trade, growth, investment and cooperation for other countries in Asia and beyond. In the coming five years, China will import more than US$10 trillion of goods, Chinese investment abroad will exceed US$500 billion, and more than 500 million outbound visits will be made by Chinese tourists. China will stick to its basic state policy of opening up, improve its investment climate, and protect the lawful rights and interests of investors. I believe that together, the people of Asian countries could drive this train of Asia's development to take Asia to an even brighter future.
中国经济发展进入新常态，将继续给包括亚洲国家在内的世界各国提供更多市场、增长、投资、合作机遇。未来5年，中国进口商品将超过10万亿美元，对外投资将超过5000亿美元，出境旅游人数将超过5亿人次。中国将坚持对外开放的基本国策，不断完善国内投资环境，保护投资者合法权益，同大家一起，共同驱动亚洲发展的列车，不断驶向更加光明的未来。
What China needs most is a harmonious and stable domestic environment and a peaceful and tranquil international environment. Turbulence or war runs against the fundamental interests of the Chinese people. The Chinese nation loves peace and has, since ancient times, held high such philosophies that "harmony is the most valuable", "peace and harmony should prevail" and "all men under heaven are brothers". China has suffered from turbulence and war for more than a century since modern times, and the Chinese people would never want to inflict the same tragedy on other countries or peoples. History has taught us that no country who tried to achieve its goal with force ever succeeded. China will be steadfast in pursuing the independent foreign policy of peace, the path of peaceful development, the win-win strategy of opening-up, and the approach of upholding justice while pursuing shared interests. China will work to promote a new type of international relations of win-win cooperation and will always remain a staunch force for world peace and common development.
中国最需要和谐稳定的国内环境与和平安宁的国际环境，任何动荡和战争都不符合中国人民根本利益。中华民族历来爱好和平，自古就崇尚“以和为贵”、“协和万邦”、“四海之内皆兄弟也”等思想。中国近代以后遭遇了100多年的动荡和战火，中国人民绝不会将自己曾经遭受过的悲惨经历强加给其他国家和民族。纵观历史，任何国家试图通过武力实现自己的发展目标，最终都是要失败的。中国将毫不动摇坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持走和平发展道路，坚持互利共赢的开放战略，秉持正确义利观，推动建立以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，始终做维护世界和平、促进共同发展的坚定力量。
Close neighbors are better than distant relatives. This is a simple truth that the Chinese people got to know in ancient times. That explains China's firm commitment to building friendship and partnership with its neighbors to foster an amicable, secure and prosperous neighborhood. Under the principle of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness, China is working actively to deepen win-win cooperation and connectivity with its neighbors to bring them even more benefit with its own development. China has signed treaties of good-neighborliness, friendship and cooperation with eight of its neighbors and is holding discussion to sign a same treaty with ASEAN. China stands ready to sigh such a treaty with all its neighbors to provide strong support for the development of bilateral relations as well as prosperity and stability in the region.
“远亲不如近邻。”这是中国人很早就认识到的一个朴素的生活道理。中国坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，坚持睦邻、安邻、富邻，秉持亲诚惠容的理念，不断深化同周边国家的互利合作和互联互通，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家。中国已经同8个周边国家签署睦邻友好合作条约，正在商谈签署中国－东盟睦邻友好合作条约，并愿同所有周边国家商签睦邻友好合作条约，为双边关系发展和地区繁荣稳定提供有力保障。
In 2013, during my visit to Kazakhstan and Indonesia, I put forward the initiatives of building a Silk Road economic belt and a 21st century maritime Silk Road. The "Belt and Road" initiative, meeting the development needs of China, countries along the routes and the region at large, will serve the common interests of relevant parties and answer the call of our time for regional and global cooperation.
2013年我访问哈萨克斯坦和印度尼西亚时，分别提出建设丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路合作倡议。“一带一路”合作倡议契合中国、沿线国家和本地区发展需要，符合有关各方共同利益，顺应了地区和全球合作潮流。
In promoting this initiative, China will follow the principle of wide consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. The programs of development will be open and inclusive, not exclusive. They will be a real chorus comprising all countries along the routes, not a solo for China itself. To develop the Belt and Road is not to replace existing mechanisms or initiatives for regional cooperation. Much to the contrary, we will build on the existing basis to help countries align their development strategies and form complementarity. Currently, more than 60 countries along the routes and international organizations have shown interest in taking part in the development of the Belt and the Road. The "Belt and Road" and the AIIB are both open initiatives. We welcome all countries along the routes and in Asia, as well as our friends and partners around the world, to take an active part in these endeavors.
“一带一路”建设秉持的是共商、共建、共享原则，不是封闭的，而是开放包容的；不是中国一家的独奏，而是沿线国家的合唱。“一带一路”建设不是要替代现有地区合作机制和倡议，而是要在已有基础上，推动沿线国家实现发展战略相互对接、优势互补。目前，已经有60多个沿线国家和国际组织对参与“一带一路”建设表达了积极态度。“一带一路”建设、亚洲基础设施投资银行都是开放的，我们欢迎沿线国家和亚洲国家积极参与，也张开臂膀欢迎五大洲朋友共襄盛举。
The "Belt and Road" initiative is not meant as rhetoric. It represents real work that could be seen and felt to bring real benefits to countries in the region. Thanks to the concerted efforts of relevant parties, the vision and action paper of the initiative has been developed. Substantive progress has been made in the establishment of the AIIB. The Silk Road Fund has been launched, and constructions of a number of infrastructure connectivity projects are moving forward. These early harvests have truly pointed to the broad prospects the "Belt and Road" initiative will bring.
“一带一路”建设不是空洞的口号，而是看得见、摸得着的实际举措，将给地区国家带来实实在在的利益。在有关各方共同努力下，“一带一路”建设的愿景与行动文件已经制定，亚洲基础设施投资银行筹建工作迈出实质性步伐，丝路基金已经顺利启动，一批基础设施互联互通项目已在稳步推进。这些早期收获向我们展现了“一带一路”的广阔前景。
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
The cause of peace and development of mankind is as lofty as its is challenging. The journey ahead will not be smooth sailing, and success may not come easily. No matter how long and difficult the journey may be, those who work together and never give up will eventually prevail. I believe that as long as we keep to our goals and make hard efforts, we will together bring about a community of common destiny and usher in a new future for Asia.
人类和平与发展的事业是崇高的事业，也是充满挑战的事业。前进的道路不会一帆风顺，期望的成果不会唾手可得。不管征程多么曲折、多么漫长，胜利总是属于那些永不放弃、百折不挠、携手前行的人们。我相信，只要我们大家认准目标、锲而不舍，就一定能携手迈向命运共同体、开创亚洲新未来！
I wish the Annual Conference a complete success.
最后，预祝年会取得圆满成功！
Thank you very much.
谢谢大家。
117. 习近平在巴基斯坦议会的演讲
构建中巴命运共同体 开辟合作共赢新征程
——在巴基斯坦议会的演讲
（2015年4月21日，伊斯兰堡）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Building a China-Pakistan Community of Shared Destiny to Pursue Closer Win-Win Cooperation
Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the Parliament of Pakistan
Islamabad, 21 April 2015
尊敬的谢里夫总理，
尊敬的拉巴尼参议院主席，
尊敬的萨迪克国民议会议长，
各位部长，
各位议员朋友，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif,
Your Excellency Senate Chairman Mr. Raza Rabbani,
Your Excellency Speaker of the National Assembly Mr. Sardar Ayaz Sadiq,
Ministers,
Members of Parliament,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，有机会来到巴基斯坦议会同各位议员朋友面对面交流，我感到非常高兴。巴基斯坦议会邀请我发表演讲，充分表明了你们对中国人民的深情厚谊，我对此表示衷心的感谢！
I am very pleased to come to the Parliament of Pakistan today to address you, members of the Parliament of Pakistan. The Parliament of Pakistan's invitation to me to address you today fully testifies to the profound friendship you cherish towards the Chinese people. Thank you very much for your kind invitation.
首先，我代表13亿多中国人民，向兄弟的巴基斯坦人民，致以最诚挚的问候和最美好的祝愿！借此机会，我要向长期以来为中巴两国友谊和合作作出贡献的各界朋友，致以崇高的敬意！	
First of all, I wish to convey, on behalf of the 1.3 billion and more Chinese people, our warmest greetings and best wishes to the brotherly people of Pakistan. I also take this opportunity to pay deep respect to all the Pakistani friends in various fields of endeavor who have over the years worked to promote friendship and cooperation between Pakistan and China.
巴基斯坦是我今年出访的第一站。这虽然是我第一次来到巴基斯坦，但我对巴基斯坦一点也不陌生。中国有句古话：“与君初相识，犹如故人归。”这就是我访问巴基斯坦的真实感受。我年轻时经常听到老一辈人讲述巴基斯坦的风土人情和中巴友谊的感人故事，早就对巴基斯坦心驰神往。一踏上这片美丽的土地，我和我的同事们就沉浸在热情友好的海洋之中，仿佛回到亲如手足的兄弟家中。	
Pakistan is the first foreign country I visit this year. Although this is my first visit to your country, Pakistan is not at all unfamiliar to me. As an old Chinese saying goes, "Meeting a good friend for the first time is like having a reunion with an old friend." This is exactly how I feel during my visit to Pakistan. When I was young, I heard a lot from the elder generation about life and scenery in Pakistan and the moving stories of friendship between China and Pakistan. So I have long been fascinated by Pakistan. The moment we arrived in your beautiful country, my colleagues and I have been overwhelmed by your warm hospitality. It is just like coming to the home of dear brothers.
中国和巴基斯坦的友谊是肝胆相照的信义之交，休戚与共的患难之交，堪称国与国友好相处的典范。巴基斯坦人民将中巴友谊比喻为“比山高，比海深，比蜜甜”。中国人民则亲切地称巴基斯坦人民为“好朋友、好邻居、好伙伴、好兄弟”。	
Friendship between China and Pakistan is based on trust and mutual support, and we have been devoted friends through both good and hard times. Our friendship is a pacesetter for amicable relations between countries. The Pakistani people say that China-Pakistan friendship is higher than the mountain, deeper than the sea and sweeter than honey. And we Chinese fondly refer to the Pakistani people as our good friends, good neighbors, good partners, and good brothers.
这次访问期间，我同侯赛因总统、谢里夫总理一致同意将中巴关系提升为全天候战略合作伙伴关系。全天候就是风雨无阻、永远同行的意思。这一定位是中巴全天候友谊和全方位合作的鲜明写照，可谓实至名归。	
During my current visit, President Hussain, Prime Minister Sharif and I agreed to elevate China-Pakistan relations to an all-weather strategic cooperative partnership. By all-weather, we mean that our two countries will always move ahead together rain or shine. This description of China-Pakistan partnership is a most appropriate one, as it aptly defines the all-weather friendship and all-round cooperation between China and Pakistan.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
巴基斯坦是一个年轻而又古老的伟大国家。这片热土孕育了辉煌灿烂的古代文明，在近代史上书写了争取民族独立、国家自强的壮丽诗篇。巴基斯坦人民善良勇敢、自尊自信，有着百折不挠、坚韧不拔的民族气质。建国60多年来，巴基斯坦政府和人民面对复杂的国内外形势，沉着应对各种严峻挑战，在捍卫国家主权独立和领土完整、建设国家和发展经济的道路上取得了显著成就。进入新世纪以来，巴基斯坦身处国际反恐前沿，付出了巨大努力，承受了巨大牺牲，为地区乃至世界和平稳定作出了突出贡献。中国人民对巴基斯坦人民充满深深的敬意。	
Pakistan is a great country, both ancient and young. It is home to a splendid ancient civilization. In modern times, Pakistan fought unremittingly to win independence and pursue national development. The Pakistanis are a kind, brave, dignified and confident people with an indomitable national character. Over the past 60 years and more since the founding of the country, the Pakistani government and people have, in the face of intricate domestic and international developments, risen up to various challenges and made remarkable achievements in upholding sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity as well as in national and economic development. In the new century, Pakistan has stood at the frontline of international fight against terrorism. It has made tremendous efforts, endured enormous sacrifice, and made outstanding contribution to upholding peace and stability of our region and the world. We in China have great admiration for the people of Pakistan.
巴基斯坦国父真纳说过：“我们不辞赴汤蹈火，因为相信阳光未来。”未来可以期待，未来也可以创造。当前，巴基斯坦面临着历史性发展机遇。谢里夫总理提出了“亚洲之虎”的梦想，为巴基斯坦勾画出宏伟蓝图。中国人民相信，巴基斯坦人民团结一心、不懈努力，一定能够在国家建设征程中创造新的奇迹、铸就新的辉煌。中国人民将始终同巴基斯坦人民站在一起！	
The founding father of Pakistan Muhammad Ali Jinnah said that "We are not afraid of the deep sea or the fire, because we believe in the sun and the future." The future is something that you either expect or shape. Today, Pakistan has a historic development opportunity. Prime Minister Sharif has crafted the vision of the "Asian Tiger Dream", outlining a great blueprint for Pakistan. The Chinese people are confident that the Pakistani people, united as one in making unremitting efforts, will surely make even greater progress in pursuing national development. The Chinese people will always stand together with the Pakistani people in your great endeavor.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
早在2000多年前，丝绸之路就在我们两个古老文明之间架起了友谊的桥梁。中国汉代使节张骞、东晋高僧法显、唐代高僧玄奘的足迹都曾经到过这里。巴基斯坦认为“诚信比财富更有用”，中国认为“人而无信，不知其可也”，两国传统文化理念契合相通。在近代，中巴曾经遭受帝国主义、殖民主义的侵略和压迫，彼此同情，相互支持。早在上世纪30年代，巴基斯坦伟大诗人伊克巴尔就写下了“沉睡的中国人民正在觉醒，喜马拉雅山的山泉已经开始沸腾”的诗句，赞扬和声援中国人民争取民族独立、反抗外来侵略的斗争。相似的历史遭遇，共同的斗争历程，使中巴人民心灵相通。	
Over 2,000 years ago, the Silk Road became a bridge of friendship linking our two ancient civilizations. Zhang Qian, China's emissary in the Han Dynasty, Faxian, the master monk in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and Xuan Zang, the great monk in the Tang Dynasty visited Pakistan. Our two countries share similar cultural traditions and values. The Pakistanis believe that good faith is more precious than wealth. And we Chinese believe that a person cannot do without credibility. In recent history, both China and Pakistan suffered from imperialist and colonialist aggression and oppression and we extended mutual sympathy and support to each other. Back in the 1930s, the great Pakistani poet Muhammad Iqbal wrote that the Chinese people are waking up from their sleep and the spring of Mount Himalaya is bursting. Those lines saluted and voiced support to the Chinese people in their struggle for independence and fight against foreign aggression. Similar historical sufferings and the common struggle have brought our hearts and minds together.
建交以来，在两国历代领导人关心和培育下，在两国各界人士共同努力下，中巴建立了全天候友谊，开展了全方位合作。无论国际风云和两国国内局势如何变化，两国在涉及彼此核心利益问题上一贯相互理解、相互支持。这份情谊堪称独一无二。	
Since the establishment of diplomatic ties, thanks to the commitment of successive Chinese and Pakistani leaders and the concerted efforts of our two peoples, our two countries have forged an all-weather friendship and pursued all-round cooperation. Despite changes in the domestic and international environment, we have always extended sympathy to and supported each other on issues crucial to our respective core interests. Such friendship is truly unique.
“疾风知劲草，烈火见真金。”我们不会忘记，巴基斯坦是最早承认新中国的国家之一，也是首个同新中国建立外交关系的伊斯兰国家。在新中国打破外部封锁、恢复在联合国合法席位、探索改革开放等关键时刻，巴基斯坦总是挺身而出，给予我们无私而宝贵的帮助。在中国遇到自然灾害和困难挑战的时候，巴基斯坦总是及时伸出援手。2008年中国汶川发生特大地震，巴基斯坦倾囊相助，出动所有的战略运输机，将全部战略储备帐篷第一时间运到了灾区。随行医疗队为节省飞机空间，拆掉了飞机上的座椅，一路上席地而坐。今天，数以千计的巴基斯坦工作人员在各地同中国职工一起夜以继日建设中国承担的项目，涌现出许多感人肺腑的故事。	
As a Chinese saying goes, "Strong wind reveals the strength of grass, and genuine gold stands the test of fire." We will never forget that Pakistan was one of the first countries to recognize New China and the first Islamic country to enter into diplomatic relations with China. At the critical times when New China endeavored to break the blockade, resume its lawful seat at the United Nations and explore ways to carry out reform and opening-up, Pakistan always came forward with selfless and valuable assistance. When China was hit by natural disasters or faced difficulties, Pakistan always extended a helping hand. In 2008, when the devastating earthquake struck Wenchuan, China, Pakistan responded immediately and sent all its transport aircraft to ship its entire reserve of tents to China. The Pakistani medical team on the transport plane had to remove all seats to make room for the tents and sat on the floor all the way to China. Today, thousands of Pakistanis are working side by side with Chinese engineers and workers on projects undertaken by China in Pakistan, and there are many moving stories about their cooperation.
同样，在巴基斯坦需要的时候，中国始终是巴方的坚强后盾。中国坚定支持巴基斯坦维护主权独立和领土完整的努力。2010年巴基斯坦遭受特大洪灾，中国第一时间伸出援手，陆空全方位施援，派出历史上最大规模的医疗救援队，首次派遣大规模车队和直升机执行救援任务，开创了中国对外援助史上的先河。2014年底，白沙瓦恐怖袭击事件发生后，中方专门邀请巴方受伤学生和家人赴华疗养，让孩子们幼小的心灵感受到中国人民真挚的情谊。	
Similarly, whenever Pakistan is in need, China has come to its help. China firmly supports Pakistan's efforts to uphold sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. When Pakistan was hit by a severe flood in 2010, China provided immediate relief assistance via air and land routes. We dispatched the largest ever medical team and sent a big convoy of vehicles and helicopters to carry out rescue operations, the first time that such an operation was undertaken in the history of China's rescue assistance. Following the terrorist attack in Peshawar at the end of 2014, China invited the students who had been injured in the attack and their family to spend some time in China for recuperation, so the trauma those kids had experienced could be healed with care and love of the Chinese people.
在不久前的也门撤侨行动中，中国军舰搭载176名巴基斯坦公民从亚丁港撤离，巴基斯坦军舰协助从穆卡拉港撤离8名中国留学生。巴方军舰指挥官下达命令：“只要中国留学生不到，我们的军舰就不离港。”这掷地有声的话语再次证明中巴友谊情比海深。
In the most recent evacuation mission in Yemen, the Chinese navy evacuated 176 Pakistanis from the Port of Aden, and the Pakistani navy evacuated eight Chinese students from Mukalla Port. The Pakistani commander gave the order that the ship would not leave until all the Chinese students were on board. His stirring words again show that China-Pakistan friendship is indeed deeper than the sea.
中国前驻巴基斯坦大使、也是我的老领导耿飚先生曾经说过：“中巴传统友谊必然像喀喇昆仑公路一样越走越宽广。”今天，中巴关系发展印证了他的预言。患难见真情，中国和巴基斯坦都越来越深切地感受到善邻的珍贵、朋友的温暖。	
Former Chinese Ambassador to Pakistan, Geng Biao, whom I once worked for, said that the traditional friendship between China and Pakistan will spread far and wide, just like the Karakoram Highway. His forecast has proved true by the thriving China-Pakistan relationship we see today. Having gone through weal and woe together, we couldn't feel more gratified to have each other as great neighbor and friend.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，中巴两国都肩负着民族振兴的历史重任，致力于强国富民的伟大梦想。我们比以往任何时候都更需要紧密携手合作，发挥两国传统友好优势、地缘毗邻优势、经济互补优势，共享机遇，共迎挑战，共谋发展，不断充实中巴命运共同体的内涵，更好造福两国人民，促进地区稳定和繁荣、为打造亚洲命运共同体发挥示范作用。	
Today, China and Pakistan both shoulder the historic mission of achieving national renewal and realizing the great dream of building a strong country and delivering a better life for our peoples. More than ever, we need to work together to strengthen the traditional friendship, fully leverage on geographic proximity and economic complementarity to share opportunities, meet challenges head on, pursue common development and substantiate the China-Pakistan community of shared destiny. This will enable us to create greater benefits to the Chinese and Pakistani peoples, contribute to stability and prosperity of our region and lead the way in building a community of common destiny in Asia.
第一，中巴要守望相助，深化战略合作。中国和巴基斯坦同为发展中国家，对内走独立自主、自力更生的道路，对外坚持和平外交政策。中巴关系的最大特点是高度政治互信，凡事为对方着想，始终站在对方的角度思考问题。我们要保持两国高层经常互访和会晤的传统。两国领导人要像走亲戚一样常来常往，就重大战略性问题加强合作，引领中巴关系不断向前发展。我们要在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互支持，坚定维护国家主权、领土完整、民族尊严，做最可靠的伙伴。	
First, we should strengthen mutual assistance and deepen strategic cooperation. Both being developing countries, we pursue an independent path of development at home and a foreign policy of peace. A defining feature of our relations is deep political trust, which means we always put ourselves in each other's position in addressing related issues. We should keep the good tradition of frequent high-level visits and meetings. As leaders, we should meet often just as family members, and work together on major strategic issues to grow China-Pakistan relationship. We should support each other on issues involving our respective core interests and major concerns, firmly uphold sovereignty, territorial integrity and national dignity, and be each other's most dependable partner.
第二，中巴要弘义融利，实现共同发展。中华文化倡导“己欲立而立人，己欲达而达人”。中国坚持正确义利观，帮助巴基斯坦就是帮助我们自己。中巴经济走廊是中巴实现共同发展的重要抓手。我们要发挥走廊建设对两国务实合作的引领作用，以走廊建设为中心，以瓜达尔港、能源、基础设施建设、产业合作为重点，形成“1+4”合作布局。走廊规划和布局要兼顾巴基斯坦各地区，让发展成果惠及巴基斯坦全体人民，进而惠及本地区各国人民。	
Second, we should advance our shared interests and achieve common development. The Chinese culture believes that to achieve success, one should let others succeed as well. China champions a right approach to principles and interests. We believe that to help Pakistan is to help ourselves. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor is a focal point of our joint efforts to achieve common development, and we should use this economic corridor to drive our practical cooperation with focus on Gwadar Port, energy, infrastructure development and industrial cooperation. The planning and layout of the Economic Corridor should cover other parts of Pakistan as well so that the fruits of its development will reach both all the people in Pakistan and the people of other countries in our region.
昨天，我们双方签署了数十项合作协议，相信这些协议将有力推动中巴务实合作，特别是推动中巴经济走廊建设取得实质性进展。为支持巴基斯坦发展经济、改善民生，中方决定向巴方提供无偿援助，用于联邦直辖部落区重建和巴方关切的民生项目。	
Yesterday, several dozen cooperation agreements were signed between the two sides. I am convinced that these agreements will boost our practical cooperation, and lead to substantive progress in the development of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. To support economic development and improve people's wellbeing in Pakistan, China will provide free assistance to Pakistan for reconstruction in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and for undertaking projects for the improvement of people's livelihood that are important to Pakistan.
第三，中巴要心心相印，坚持世代友好。人民是推动国家进步和历史发展的决定力量，两国人民支持是中巴全天候友谊和全方位合作的不竭动力。2015年是中巴友好交流年，我们要以友城交流、文化中心、新闻媒体为平台，开展形式多样、内容丰富的庆祝活动。我们要延续互派百人青年团的传统，鼓励两国青年一代多来往、多交流。中国将在未来5年内为巴方提供2000个培训名额，并帮助巴方培训1000名汉语教师。我们欢迎巴方积极参与中国－南亚人文交流计划，让中巴友好更加深入人心。	
Third, we should enhance close exchanges to build lasting friendship. It is the people who advance progress of nations and history. The support of our peoples is the inexhaustible source of force fostering China-Pakistan all-weather friendship and all-round cooperation. This year is the Year of China-Pakistan Friendly Exchanges. We should use the platforms of sister cities, cultural centers and media organizations to conduct diverse and colorful events of celebration. We should continue to send 100-member youth groups to visit each other's country and encourage more contacts and exchanges between young Chinese and Pakistanis. In the next five years, China will provide 2,000 training opportunities for Pakistan and train 1,000 Chinese language teachers for Pakistan. We welcome Pakistan's participation in the program of people-to-people and cultural exchanges between China and South Asia to strengthen popular support for China-Pakistan friendship.
第四，中巴要风雨同舟，共对安全挑战。中巴两国安全利益休戚相关。长期以来，巴方克服种种困难，为中国西部边陲安全稳定作出了重要贡献，我们对此铭记于心。中方将帮助巴方加强反恐和安全能力建设，同巴方加强配合，共同应对日益增多的非传统安全威胁，为两国经济合作和共同发展提供可靠的安全保障。	
Fourth, we should stick together in face of difficulty and jointly meet security challenges. Our two countries share a common stake in security. Over the years, Pakistan has overcome all difficulties and contributed greatly to the security and stability of China's western border areas, and this is something we will never forget. China will assist Pakistan in strengthening its capacity for fighting terrorism and ensuring security, and work with Pakistan to tackle rising non-traditional security threats so as to provide a reliable security guarantee for bilateral economic cooperation and common development.
第五，中巴要勇担责任，加强国际协作。中巴关系远远超出了双边范畴。双方要就国际和地区形势保持战略沟通，在重大全球和地区问题上加强协调和配合。中方支持巴方在阿富汗问题上发挥建设性作用，愿同巴方一道推动阿富汗和解进程，支持阿富汗平稳过渡。今年是联合国成立和世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年，我们要重申对联合国宪章宗旨和原则的坚定承诺，共同推动构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系。	
Fifth, we should fulfill our due responsibilities and increase coordination on international issues. China-Pakistan relations have gone well beyond the bilateral context. We should maintain strategic communication on regional and international developments and increase coordination and collaboration on major regional and global issues. China supports Pakistan in playing a constructive role on the Afghan issue and will work with Pakistan to advance the reconciliation process and smooth transition in Afghanistan. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the victory of the world's anti-fascist war. We should reaffirm our abiding commitment to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and work together to build a new type of international relations of win-win cooperation.
不论国际风云如何变幻，中国将始终从战略高度和长远角度看待中巴关系，将巴基斯坦置于中国外交优先位置。巴基斯坦有一句谚语：“风，不是总朝着海员希望的方向吹。”我要说，只要我们的心总是朝着两国人民希望的方向想，劲总是朝着两国人民希望的方向使，就一定能够战胜前进道路上的一切艰难险阻，中巴全天候战略合作伙伴关系将会领域更宽广、层次更丰富、内涵更充实。	
No matter how the international landscape may change, China will always approach its relations with Pakistan from a strategic and long-term perspective and give Pakistan high priority on its diplomatic agenda. There is a saying in Pakistan that the wind does not always blow in the direction which the sailor wishes. Yes, that is true. But as long as we are guided by the aspirations of our people and strive to meet such aspirations, we will be able to surmount all the obstacles on the way, and China-Pakistan all-weather strategic cooperative partnership will be further strengthened and enriched.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当前，中国正处在全面建成小康社会决定性阶段。中国与世界的互动和利益融合更加紧密，中国将同包括巴基斯坦在内的发展伙伴加强合作，为地区和全球经济增长作出新的更大贡献。	
China has reached the crucial stage of building a society of initial prosperity in all respects. As China and its interests are increasingly integrated with the world, we will enhance cooperation with Pakistan and all other development partners to contribute more to the economic growth in both our region and the world.
中华民族历来爱好和平。中国人在两千多年前就认识到“国虽大，好战必亡”的道理。中国人民崇尚“己所不欲，勿施于人”，中国不认同“国强必霸论”。走和平发展道路，对中国有利，对亚洲有利，对世界也有利，任何力量都不能动摇中国和平发展的信念。中国坚持不干涉别国内政原则，不会把自己的意志强加于人，即使再强大也永远不称霸。	
The Chinese nation loves peace. Over 2,000 years ago, the Chinese already knew that a belligerent country, however big it may be, is doomed. "Do not do onto others what you do not want others to do onto you." This is a principle that we Chinese adhere to, and we do not subscribe to the belief that a country is bound to seek hegemony when it becomes powerful. Peaceful development is in China's interests, and also in the interests of Asia and the world. Nothing can shake our resolve to pursue peaceful development. China is committed to the principle of non-interference in other's internal affairs; it will never impose its own will onto others; and China will never seek hegemony however strong it may become.
中国将坚持合作共赢的理念，坚定不移发展同世界各国的友好合作，坚持按照亲诚惠容的理念，深化同周边国家的互利合作，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家，永远做发展中国家的可靠朋友和真诚伙伴。中国将坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略，全面推进对外开放，发展开放型经济体系，努力为亚洲和世界发展带来新的机遇和空间。	
China will continue to pursue win-win cooperation and enhance friendship and cooperation with other countries. It will stay committed to the policy of affinity, sincerity, mutual-benefit and inclusiveness. It will deepen win-win cooperation with its neighbors so as to deliver more benefits to them through its own development. China will remain a reliable friend and sincere partner of other developing countries. China will continue to pursue a win-win strategy for opening-up, and advance all-round opening-up to build an open economy. This will create new development opportunities and space to both Asia and the world.
中国提出建设丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路倡议，是在新形势下扩大全方位开放的重要举措，也是要致力于使更多国家共享发展机遇和成果。我们希望同“一带一路”沿线国家加强合作，实现道路联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、政策沟通、民心相通，共同打造开放合作平台，为地区可持续发展提供新动力。	
The initiative of building a Silk Road Economic Belt and a 21st Century Maritime Silk Road (the Belt and Road Initiative) that China has launched is a significant move to fully open up itself under the new conditions. This initiative also reflects China's commitment to sharing development opportunities and outcomes with more countries. We will strengthen cooperation with countries along the land and maritime Silk Roads and realize the connectivity of roads, trade, finance, policies and our peoples, so as to jointly build an open platform for cooperation and create new impetus to achieve sustainable development in the related regions.
南亚地处“一带一路”海陆交汇之处，是推进“一带一路”建设的重要方向和合作伙伴。中巴经济走廊和孟中印缅经济走廊与“一带一路”关联紧密，进展顺利。两大走廊建设将有力促进有关国家经济增长，并为深化南亚区域合作提供新的强大动力。	
South Asia is where the land and maritime Silk Roads meet. It is therefore a focal area and important cooperation partner for advancing the Belt and Road Initiative. Good progress has been made in building the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor and the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Economic Corridor which are closely connected with the land and maritime Silk Roads. The building of these two economic corridors will give a strong boost to the economic growth of the related countries and provide a strong new force for deepening regional cooperation in South Asia.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
和平、发展、合作是我们这个伟大时代的主题。广阔富饶的南亚地区蕴含着无限发展生机，勤劳智慧的南亚人民正在奋力开拓地区发展新局面，打造世界经济新的增长极。	
Peace, development and cooperation are the theme of our great times. The vast and richly endowed South Asia has boundless potential for development. The hard-working and talented people of South Asia are making vigorous efforts to speed up development in the region and turn it into a new pole of growth for the world economy.
中国是南亚最大的邻国。一个和平稳定、发展繁荣的南亚符合中国利益。中国愿同南亚国家的发展战略有效对接，实现互利发展，共同繁荣。我去年访问南亚三国期间，提出了加强中国同南亚合作的一系列倡议，目前正在稳步落实之中。中方尊重南亚地区的独特文化和历史传统，愿做南亚国家的真诚伙伴，同地区国家相互尊重、平等相待，照顾彼此舒适度，确保双方关系长期健康发展。	
China is the biggest neighbor of South Asia. A peaceful and stable South Asia that enjoys development and prosperity serves China's interests. China is ready to pursue its development strategy with that of the South Asian countries in mind to realize mutually beneficial development and common prosperity. During my visit to three South Asian countries last year, I put forward a number of initiatives to strengthen China's cooperation with the South Asian countries, which are being implemented. China respects the unique culture and historical traditions of the South Asian region. We are a sincere partner of South Asian countries. We will treat each other with respect and as equals, and accommodate each other's comfort level to ensure long-term and sound growth of our relations.
只有相互合作、互利共赢，才能做大共同利益蛋糕，走向共同繁荣。我们愿将南亚作为向西开放的重点地区，同南亚各国加强发展经验互鉴，推动发展优势互补。中方愿在南南合作框架内，对南亚国家提供力所能及的帮助和支持。	
Only with win-win cooperation can we enlarge the pie of common interests and realize common prosperity. South Asia occupies a priority on China's westward opening-up agenda, and we will share more development practices with the South Asian countries to complement each other's development endeavors. China is ready to do more to provide assistance and support to South Asian countries within the framework of South-South cooperation.
中国和南亚国家都拥有悠久历史，都崇尚向善友爱、包容互鉴、和谐共生。作为亚洲文明对话的重要组成部分，中国愿同南亚国家加强文明对话，共同传播东方智慧，弘扬亚洲价值。	
Both China and the South Asian countries have a time-honored history, and we both value benevolence, friendship, inclusiveness, mutual learning, harmony and co-existence. China is ready to strengthen inter-civilization dialogue with South Asian countries, an important part of such dialogue across Asia, so as to jointly promote the wisdom of the East and Asian values.
开放包容、联合自强，是亚洲国家实现发展繁荣和民族振兴的成功经验，也是今后实现更大发展的必由之路。中国愿同南亚国家加强合作，一道推进南亚和亚洲区域合作进程。中国愿提升同南盟合作水平，同南亚国家在多边框架内加强国际协作，共同维护广大发展中国家利益。	
It is thanks to openness, inclusiveness, unity and self-reliance that the Asian countries have succeeded in promoting development, prosperity and national renewal. We must continue to be guided by such visions to achieve even greater development in the future. China will strengthen cooperation with the South Asian countries to jointly advance regional cooperation in South Asia and Asia as a whole. China will upgrade its cooperation with the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, and step up international coordination with the South Asian countries under multilateral frameworks to jointly uphold the interests of developing countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
构建中巴命运共同体，是中巴两国政府和人民从两国根本利益出发作出的战略抉择。巴基斯坦国父真纳说：“只有通过团结一致的努力，才能把我们的理想变成现实。”让我们携起手来，共同开创两国更加美好的未来！	
To build a China-Pakistan community of shared destiny is a strategic decision made by our two governments and peoples. It meets the fundamental interests of our two countries. Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founding father of Pakistan, once observed that only through united efforts can we turn our ideals into reality. Let us work together to create an even brighter future for China and Pakistan.
谢谢大家！	
Thank you!
105. 习近平在新加坡国立大学的演讲
深化合作伙伴关系共建亚洲美好家园
——在新加坡国立大学的演讲
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年11月7日）
Forging a Strong Partnership to Enhance Prosperity of Asia
-- Speech at the National University of Singapore
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
7 November 2015
尊敬的李显龙总理，
尊敬的张志贤副总理，
尊敬的陈祝全校长，
尊敬的王庚武所长，
老师们，同学们，女士们，先生们：
Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong,
Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean,
NUS President Mr. Tan Chorh Chuan,
Professor Wang Gungwu,
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
大家好！很高兴来到新加坡国立大学，并利用“新加坡讲座”这个平台，同各位同学和各界朋友见面。今年是中新建交25周年，我很荣幸应陈庆炎总统邀请，对有着“花园国家”美誉的新加坡进行国事访问。
Good morning! I am delighted to come to the National University of Singapore and talk to you as a guest speaker of Singapore Lecture. This year marks the 25th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Singapore, and it gives me great pleasure to pay a state visit to the garden state of Singapore at the invitation of President Tan Keng Yam.
新加坡国立大学拥有110年悠久历史，是亚洲乃至世界知名高校。李光耀先生、陈庆炎总统、纳丹先生、吴作栋先生等新加坡领导人都是国大校友。可以说，这里桃李芬芳、人才辈出。贵校倡导“人才不设墙”、“观念不设墙”、“思维不设墙”、“知识不设墙”的“无墙文化”，体现了新加坡创新进取和开放包容精神。这是贵校乃至贵国成功的一个重要原因。
With a history of 110 years, the National University of Singapore is renowned both in Asia and internationally. Many Singaporean leaders such as Mr. Lee Kuan Yew, President Tan Keng Yam, Mr. S. R. Nathan and Mr. Goh Chok Tong, graduated from NUS. Indeed, NUS has produced a galaxy of talents and outstanding public leaders for Singapore. NUS champions the vision that there should be no walls around minds, no walls to ideas, no walls to talent and no walls between discovery. Such a no-walls culture embodies the creative, enterprising, open and inclusive spirit of Singapore, an important factor contributing to the success of NUS and Singapore.
今年是新加坡建国50周年。半个世纪以来，新加坡人民筚路蓝缕、发愤图强，凭借勤劳智慧把新加坡建设成了亚洲最发达的国家之一，成为世界上重要的经济金融中心、航运中心、炼化中心，国家发展取得了举世瞩目的成就。新加坡取得的成就生动诠释了“靠人粮满仓，靠天空米缸”的道理。我们对新加坡人民的成功表示衷心祝贺。
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the independence of Singapore. In the last 50 years, the hard-working and visionary people of Singapore have endured hardships and succeeded in building Singapore into one of the most advanced countries in Asia and a leading international economic, financial, shipping, and refining and petrochemicals center. Its achievements in national development are widely recognized. As the saying goes, when people only rely on heaven, their rice jars will be empty, but when people make efforts, their barn will be full of grain. This saying vividly reflects the spirit of Singapore, and we would like to express our sincere congratulations to the Singaporean people on their success.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
中国和新加坡是一衣带水的友好邻邦，友好交往源远流长。15世纪初，中国著名航海家郑和扬帆远航，多次到访新加坡。新加坡海事博物馆里有一艘按原尺寸复制的郑和宝船，以纪念这一伟大事件。明末清初，许多来自中国广东、福建的民众漂洋过海到南洋谋生，带来了中华文化和技术，也播下了中新友好的种子。
China and Singapore are friendly neighbors across the sea with a long history of amicable exchanges. In the early 15th century, China's great navigator, Zheng He, called Singapore several times on his ocean voyages. A full size replica of the treasure boat of Zheng He is on display in the maritime museum of Singapore to honor this historic event. In the late Ming and early Qing dynasties, many people from China's Guangdong and Fujian provinces migrated to Southeast Asia, bringing with them Chinese culture and skills, and sowing the seeds of China-Singapore friendship.
1978年，邓小平先生访问新加坡，拉开了新时期中新友好合作的序幕。当时的中国正在开拓改革开放和社会主义现代化建设的新路，积极探索中国特色社会主义道路。在李光耀先生带领下，新加坡兼具东方价值观和国际视野，走出了一条符合新加坡国情的发展道路。在目睹新加坡创造的经济成就后，邓小平先生表示，中国要向新加坡学习。新加坡的实践为中国破解改革发展中的一些难题提供了宝贵借鉴，中国发展也为新加坡带来了巨大发展机遇。
In 1978, Mr. Deng Xiaoping visited Singapore, opening the friendly relations and cooperation between our two countries in the new era. At that time, China was embarking on a path of reform, opening up and socialist modernization and exploring the building of socialism with distinctive Chinese features. Here in your country, under the leadership of Mr. Lee Kwan Yew, Singapore succeeded in pursuing a development path suited to its national conditions by combining the Eastern values with an international vision. After seeing first-hand Singapore's economic achievements, Mr. Deng Xiaoping said that China needs to learn from Singapore. China has drawn on the Singaporean practices in addressing tough challenges encountered in its reform and development endeavors. On its part, China's development has also created tremendous opportunities for Singapore's development.
现在，中新两国政治互信不断加深，务实合作深入拓展。苏州工业园区、天津生态城两个政府间合作项目成功推进，以现代互联互通和现代服务经济为主题的第三个政府间合作项目即将在中国重庆落户。中国是新加坡最大贸易伙伴，新加坡是中国最大投资来源国和重要投资目的地。两国金融合作方兴未艾，新加坡已经成为重要的人民币离岸交易中心之一。双方在科技环保、教育人文、社会治理等领域合作成果丰硕。中新关系25年来的发展，紧密契合两国发展战略，契合中国发展方向和新加坡独特优势，走出了一条与时俱进的合作之路。
Today, there are increasing political mutual trust and deepening practical cooperation between the two countries. The Suzhou Industrial Park and the Tianjin Eco City, two cooperation projects launched by the Chinese and Singaporean governments, have achieved full success. The third China-Singapore government-to-government cooperation project, with focus on connectivity and a service economy, will soon be launched in Chongqing, China. China is now Singapore's biggest trading partner, and Singapore is the biggest source of foreign investment and an important investment destination for China. The financial cooperation between the two countries is booming, with Singapore being one of the key Renminbi offshore trading centers. In addition, cooperation in science and technology, environmental protection, education, people-to-people exchanges, and social governance has delivered fruitful outcomes. The 25 years of growth in China-Singapore relations has closely aligned the development strategies of the two countries as well as China's development goal and Singapore's unique strengths, thus creating a new way of cooperation that is in keeping with the times.
在中新建交25周年之际，我们一致同意将中国和新加坡关系定位确定为与时俱进的全方位合作伙伴关系。我相信，在中新两国人民共同努力下，中新关系必将迎来新的更大的发展。
On this occasion of the 25th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations, China and Singapore have agreed to turn our relations into an all-round cooperative partnership progressing with the times. I am confident that with the concerted efforts of our two peoples, China-Singapore relationship will surely make new and even greater progress.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
中国和东南亚山水相连，血脉相通，有文字可考的交往史长达2000多年。中华文明和东南亚文明千年互鉴共生。中国自古讲求和而不同、敦亲睦邻，同东南亚文化深度契合。中华文化追求的仁爱尚德、谦恭自省、敏而好学、止于至善，《三国演义》、《水浒传》等中国文学作品中人物具备的忠义品质，也是东南亚人民所推崇的。东南亚的饮食、音乐、建筑、绘画等也影响了中国民俗。
China and many Southeast Asian countries are connected by mountains and rivers, and China shares close cultural bonds with all countries in Southeast Asia. We have a recorded history of interaction of more than 2,000 years. The Chinese and Southeast Asian civilizations have grown together through mutual enrichment over the millennia. Since the ancient times, we Chinese have valued harmony in diversity and good-neighborliness, which have much in common with the values of the people of Southeast Asia. The Chinese culture cherishes such values as benevolence, virtue, modesty, self-reflection, learning, and pursuit of excellence. In many Chinese literary classics such as the Romance of the Three Kingdoms and All Men Are Brothers, the protagonists are both loyal and righteous, and these are the qualities that are admired by the Southeast Asian people as well. Similarly, the cuisine, music, architecture, painting and religions of Southeast Asia have also influenced the Chinese culture.
近代以来，中国和东南亚国家在国家独立和民族解放的进程中彼此激励、相互支持，在经济社会发展的历程中相互启迪、通力合作，在应对亚洲金融危机、国际金融危机和抗击印度洋海啸、中国汶川特大地震中守望相助、和衷共济。时至今日，中国正同东南亚国家一道，书写着自身发展的历史新篇章。
In modern times, China and Southeast Asian countries encouraged and supported each other in the cause of independence and liberation, and we have inspired and worked with each other in economic and social development. We assisted each other in overcoming the Asian financial crisis, the international financial crisis, the Indian Ocean tsunami and the devastating earthquake in Wenchuan, China. Today, China and Southeast Asian countries are making new progress in our respective development endeavors.
上世纪60年代起，东南亚国家创建东盟，走上了联合自强之路，并在近半个世纪中风雨兼程，实现了从动荡贫弱到稳定发展的跨越，成为地区和国际舞台上维护和平、促进发展、深化合作的一支重要力量。东盟在自身发展和对外交往中，形成了独具特色的“东盟方式”，强调相互尊重、协商一致、照顾各方舒适度，为地区国家发展关系、深化合作、推进一体化提供了有益借鉴。今年年底，东盟即将建成共同体，这是亚洲地区第一个次区域共同体。中国将坚定发展同东盟的友好合作，坚定支持东盟发展壮大，坚定支持东盟共同体建设，坚定支持东盟在东亚区域合作中发挥主导作用。
The Southeast Asian countries established the ASEAN in the 1960s in an effort to enhance development through unity. For nearly half a century, the Southeast Asian countries have addressed instability and underdevelopment and achieved stability and development, becoming an important force of peace, development and cooperation in regional and international arena. ASEAN has developed a distinctive ASEAN approach to both its own development and external affairs featuring mutual respect, consensus building and accommodating the comfort level of all parties. This has served the countries in the region well in their efforts to develop their relations, deepen cooperation and enhance integration. By the end of this year, the building of the ASEAN Community is expected to be completed, which will be the very first sub-regional community in Asia. China is committed to developing friendly relations and cooperation with ASEAN. We support ASEAN's development and growth, its community building endeavor as well as ASEAN centrality in East Asia regional cooperation.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
中国始终将周边置于外交全局的首要位置，视促进周边和平、稳定、发展为己任。中国推动全球治理体系朝着更加公正合理方向发展，推动国际关系民主化，推动建立以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，推动建设人类命运共同体，都是从周边先行起步。
China's neighborhood occupies a top priority on its diplomatic agenda, and China has the unshirkable responsibility to ensure peace, stability and development in its neighborhood. China is dedicated to promoting a more just and equitable global governance system, enhancing democracy in international relations as well as the building of a new type of international relations based on win-win cooperation and a community of shared future for mankind. Efforts to reach this goal should naturally start in its neighborhood.
中国坚持与邻为善、以邻为伴，坚持奉行睦邻、安邻、富邻的周边外交政策，坚持践行亲诚惠容的周边外交理念，坚持共同、综合、合作、可持续的亚洲安全观，致力于构建更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体，推动建设亚洲命运共同体。
China is committed to pursuing partnership with its neighbors and a neighborhood diplomacy of amity, sincerity, mutual-benefit and inclusiveness and fostering a harmonious, secure and prosperous neighborhood. China champions a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security in Asia. China endeavors to build a close community of shared future with ASEAN, and a community of shared future with all countries in Asia.
和平发展思想是中华文化的内在基因，讲信修睦、协和万邦是中国周边外交的基本内涵。近代以来，外敌入侵、内部战乱曾给中国人民带来巨大灾难。中国人民深知和平的宝贵，绝不会放弃维护和平的决心和愿望，绝不会把自身曾经遭遇的苦难强加于他人。中国繁荣昌盛是趋势所在，但国强必霸不是历史定律。中国自古倡导“强不执弱，富不侮贫”，深知“国虽大，好战必亡”的道理。一些人渲染“中国威胁论”，这或者是对中国历史文化和现实政策不了解，或者是出于一种误解和偏见，或者是有着某种不可告人的目的。中国坚持走和平发展道路，坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，不是权宜之计，而是我们的战略选择和郑重承诺。
The belief in peaceful development is deeply rooted in the Chinese mind, and the vision of harmony and peaceful co-existence underpins China's neighborhood diplomacy. The Chinese people, having suffered so much from foreign aggression and internal turmoil in modern times, cherish peace. We will never waver in our determination to uphold peace, and we will never want to see others suffer what happened to us. China is now on the road to development and prosperity, but we reject the logic that a country which grows strong is bound to pursue hegemony. What we in China believe, starting with our forefathers, is that the strong and rich should not bully the weak and poor. And we see great truth in the saying that "a warlike country, however big it might be, is bound to perish." Some people are fanning up the so-called China threat. They may do so out of ignorance about China's past and present as well as its culture and policies, or they may do so out of misunderstanding of and bias against China. Some may even have some kind of hidden agenda in doing so. Let me be clear: China is committed to peaceful development and pursues an independent foreign policy of peace. This is not an expediency. It is a strategic decision made by China as well as a solemn pledge it has made to the world.
近代以来，中国经历了长达一个多世纪的积贫积弱、风雨飘摇的年代，我们比谁都懂得发展的重要、稳定的可贵。中国的发展进程得到周边国家帮助和支持，中国发展成果也为周边国家所分享。中国愿意把自身发展同周边国家发展更紧密地结合起来，欢迎周边国家搭乘中国发展“快车”、“便车”，让中国发展成果更多惠及周边，让大家一起过上好日子。
Having gone through poverty and turmoil for over a century, China knows full well the importance of development and stability. China has received support from its neighbors in its development endeavors, and China's development, in turn, has benefitted its neighbors. China hopes that its own development and that of its neighbors will complement each other, and China welcomes its neighbors to board the fast train of China's development so that they can share more from China's development.
两年前，我在访问中亚和东南亚时，提出建设“一带一路”的设想。这是发展的倡议、合作的倡议、开放的倡议，强调的是共商、共建、共享的平等互利方式。目前，这个倡议已经形成势头。中国发布了愿景与行动的纲领性文件，60多个国家和国际组织表达积极参与的态度，中国同很多国家达成了合作协议，亚洲基础设施投资银行协定已经签署，丝路基金已经着手实施具体项目，一批多边或双边大项目合作正稳步推进。“一带一路”倡议的首要合作伙伴是周边国家，首要受益对象也是周边国家。我们欢迎周边国家参与到合作中来，共同推进“一带一路”建设，携手实现和平、发展、合作的愿景。
Two years ago, during my visit to Central Asia and Southeast Asia, I put forward the initiative of building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. The Belt and Road Initiative, as it is now called, is about openness, development and cooperation, and it calls for pursuing joint development and sharing benefits on the basis of equality and mutual benefit. The initiative has gained momentum. China has released the Vision and Actions of the "Belt and Road", a comprehensive document about the Initiative. Over 60 countries and international organizations have expressed interest to become part of the Initiative, and China has reached cooperation agreements with many of them. The Articles of Agreement of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) has been signed, the Silk Road Fund has started implementing specific projects. And a number of major multilateral and bilateral projects are well underway. The main partners of the Belt and Road Initiative are China's neighbors, and they will be the first to benefit from it. China welcomes its neighbors to get involved in the Belt and Road Initiative. Together, we can surely translate the vision of peace, development and win-win cooperation into reality.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
时代潮流，浩浩荡荡。当前，中国同周边国家关系站在了新的历史起点上。亚洲是世界经济发展高地，宏观经济基本面稳定向好，同时受内外因素影响，承受了较大下行压力。亚洲政通人和、社会稳定，是全球格局中的稳定板块，同时安全问题十分复杂，恐怖主义、极端主义、跨国犯罪、网络安全、重大自然灾害等非传统安全挑战增多。亚洲绝大多数国家的政策取向是通过协商谈判处理矛盾分歧，同时一些国家互信不足、时有纷争。亚洲国家相互依存日益加深，地区一体化进程不断加速，同时区域合作路径不一，安全合作长期滞后于经济合作。这些问题都需要我们共同应对和破解。
The tide of history moves on and we must follow it. We have now reached a new historical starting point to grow China's relations with its neighbors. The fundamentals of Asia's economy are sound, and Asia remains an engine driving world economic growth. On the other hand, the Asian economy also faces significant downward pressure caused by both internal and external factors. Asia's political and social stability contributes to global stability. Yet, the region also faces a host of intricate security issues, particularly the rising non-traditional challenges such as terrorism, extremism, cross-border crimes, cyber security and major natural disasters. In response, most Asian countries have sought to settle differences through consultation and negotiation. But lack of mutual trust has given rise to disputes from time to time. The Asian countries are more interconnected than ever before thanks to the accelerated process of regional integration, but they may take different approaches to regional cooperation and security cooperation in the region is out of step with economic cooperation. All these are challenges that we should meet.
我一直在思考新形势下中国同包括东南亚在内的周边国家深化合作、共谋发展的大计，愿在此提出一些想法和主张。
I have been thinking about how China's cooperation with the Southeastern Asian countries and its other neighbors can be deepened under the new circumstances to boost our common development. And the following is what I believe we should do together:
——共同维护和平安宁。维护亚洲和平是中国同周边国家的历史责任和共同担当。亚洲各国人民要永不为敌、增进互信，共同守护亚洲和平安宁，为亚洲各国发展和人民安居乐业创造良好条件。
-- We should work together to uphold peace and stability. Upholding peace in Asia is the shared historical responsibility of both China and its neighbors. We Asians should never allow animosity to divide us. We should increase mutual trust, work together to uphold peace and stability in Asia and foster a sound environment that enables us to achieve development and prosperity.
——深入对接发展战略。亚洲各国人民要聚精会神推动发展、改善民生，互帮互助，从各自发展战略中发掘新的合作动力，规划新的合作愿景，锁定新的合作成果，做大互利合作的“蛋糕”，为彼此经济增长提供更多动能。
-- We should form synergy between our respective development strategies. We Asian countries should give priority to development to make life better for our peoples. We should tap into our respective development strategies and engage in mutual assistance to create new drivers of cooperation. We should draw up new cooperation plans and lock in new outcomes such mutually beneficial cooperation delivers. As the pie of cooperation grows bigger, it will lend more momentum to growth in our respective countries.
——积极开展安全合作。“单丝不线，孤掌难鸣。”亚洲各国人民要践行亚洲安全观，协调推进地区安全治理，共同担当和应对传统和非传统安全问题，坚持以和平方式通过友好协商解决矛盾分歧，坚持发展和安全并重，共谋互尊互信、聚同化异、开放包容、合作共赢的邻国相处之道。
-- We should actively pursue security cooperation. As a Chinese saying goes, a single line of silk doesn't make a thread, and one hand cannot clap. We Asian countries should foster a vision of security suited to Asia and take a holistic approach to handling security issues in the region. We should jointly address both traditional and non-traditional security issues. We should stay committed to peaceful settlement of differences and disputes through friendly consultation, and we should give equal emphasis to both development and security. Together, we can achieve open, inclusive and win-win cooperation among neighbors that is based on mutual respect and mutual trust, and achieved by expanding common ground and narrowing differences.
——不断巩固人缘相亲。亚洲各国人民要从悠久的历史文明中汲取养分，凝聚对亚洲价值的集体认同，拓展人文交流合作，夯实睦邻友好的社会民意基础，把“和”、“合”的传统理念付诸彼此相处之道，把修睦合作的薪火世代传承下去。
-- We should strengthen the close bonds among our peoples. Asia is home to time-honored civilizations which have nurtured the collective Asian values and an Asian identity. We should draw on this valuable asset and encourage people-to-people exchanges to strengthen the popular support for good neighborly relations. The traditional Asian value of peace and harmony should continue to guide our exchanges. By doing so, we can ensure long-term harmony and cooperation among the Asian countries.
一段时间以来，大家都关心中国在南海问题上的政策。我要说的是，南海诸岛自古以来就是中国领土，维护自身的领土主权和正当合理的海洋权益，是中国政府必须承担的责任。中国南海政策的出发点和落脚点都是维护南海地区和平稳定。在中国和南海沿岸国共同努力下，南海局势总体是和平的，航行和飞越自由从来没有问题，将来也不会有问题，因为首先中国最需要南海航行通畅。尽管中国拥有主权的一些南海岛礁被他人侵占，但我们始终主张通过和平谈判方式解决问题。中国将坚持同直接当事国在尊重历史事实的基础上，根据国际法，通过谈判和协商解决有关争议，我们完全有能力，也有信心同东盟国家一道，维护好南海地区的和平稳定。我们欢迎域外国家参与亚洲和平与发展事业，为此发挥积极作用。当前，亚洲各国政府面临的最重要课题是如何实现持续快速发展，这需要一个和平稳定的环境。这是地区国家的最大公约数，域外国家也应该理解和尊重这一点并发挥建设性作用。
I know that people have been closely following China's policy on the South China Sea. Let me make this clear: The South China Sea islands have been China's territory since ancient times. It is the bounden duty of the Chinese government to uphold China's territorial sovereignty and legitimate maritime rights and interests. The starting point and ultimate purpose of China's policy toward the South China Sea is to maintain peace and stability there. Thanks to the joint efforts of China and other littoral states, the situation in the South China Sea is generally peaceful. There has never been any problem with the freedom of navigation and overflight; nor will there ever be any in the future, for China needs unimpeded commerce through these waters more than anyone else. Although some of the islands over which China has sovereignty have been occupied by others, we have all along advocated a resolution of these issues through peaceful negotiation. China will continue to seek resolution of the disputes through negotiation and consultation with countries directly involved on the basis of respecting historical facts and in accordance with the international law. China has every capacity and confidence to work with ASEAN countries to maintain peace and stability in the South China Sea. We welcome non-Asian countries to make a positive contribution to peace and development in Asia. At present, the most important task facing all Asian governments is to ensure robust and sustained development, which requires a peaceful and stable environment. This is the biggest common interest of Asian countries. Non-Asian countries should understand and respect this and play a constructive role.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
大家关心中国的发展走向。中共十八届五中全会刚刚闭幕，会议审议通过了关于制定国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划的建议，描绘了中国未来5年发展蓝图。按照我们的规划，到2020年，中国将全面建成小康社会，国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入比2010年翻一番，实现我们确定的“两个一百年”奋斗目标的第一个百年奋斗目标。
I understand you are quite interested in China's future development. The Communist Party of China has just concluded the fifth Plenum of its 18th Central Committee. This plenum adopted a proposal for the 13th Five-Year Plan for national economic and social development, which is a blueprint for China's development in the next five years. Our goal is to finish the building of a society of initial prosperity in all respects and double China's 2010 GDP and per capita income for urban and rural residents by 2020. This is the first of our two centenary goals.
——为了实现这个目标，我们将坚持全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党的战略布局，坚持发展是第一要务，以提高发展质量和效益为中心，加快形成引领经济发展新常态的体制机制和发展方式，保持战略定力，坚持稳中求进，统筹推进经济建设、政治建设、文化建设、社会建设、生态文明建设和党的建设。
To achieve this goal, we will pursue a four-pronged strategy of deepening reform, advancing law-based governance and improving Party conduct in an all-round way with the goal of finishing building a society of initial prosperity in all respects. We will pursue development as a top priority, with emphasis on its quality and efficiency. We will accelerate efforts to put in place systems, institutions and development models that boost economic development under new conditions. We will maintain strategic resolve, pursue progress while ensuring stability, and promote coordinated development of China's economy, political system, the cultural sector, society, the environment and the Party.
——为了实现这个目标，我们将牢固树立创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念。坚持创新发展，就是要把创新摆在国家发展全局的核心位置，让创新贯穿国家一切工作，让创新在全社会蔚然成风。坚持协调发展，就是要重点促进城乡区域协调发展，促进经济社会协调发展，促进新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化同步发展，在增强国家硬实力的同时注重提升国家软实力，不断增强发展整体性。坚持绿色发展，就是要坚持节约资源和保护环境的基本国策，坚持可持续发展，形成人与自然和谐发展现代化建设新格局，为全球生态安全作出新贡献。坚持开放发展，就是要奉行互利共赢的开放战略，发展更高层次的开放型经济，积极参与全球经济治理和公共产品供给，构建广泛的利益共同体。坚持共享发展，就是要坚持发展为了人民、发展依靠人民、发展成果由人民共享，使全体人民在共建共享发展中有更多获得感，朝着共同富裕方向稳步前进。
To achieve this goal, we will follow the principles of innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development. To pursue innovative development is to place innovation at the core of our national development endeavor and enable it to underpin all endeavors of the country and become a trend in the country. Coordinated development requires us to promote balanced development between urban and rural areas and between economic and social development, and ensure balanced progress in promoting a new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization. It also means strengthening China's soft power as well as hard power and overall national development. To achieve green development, we will follow the basic state policy of resource conservation and environmental protection, pursue sustainable development, and promote modernization in a new way that enhances harmony between human development and the preservation of nature. By doing so, we will contribute more to global ecological security. Open development demonstrates China's commitment to pursue the win-win strategy of opening-up, develop a high standard open economy, take an active part in global economic governance and the provision of public goods, and build a community of extensive common interests. Inclusive development means development for the people, by the people and its fruits shared by the people. It means we must work hard to make all of our people benefit more from such development and eventually achieve common prosperity.
——为了实现这个目标，中国要加强同世界各国特别是周边邻国的合作。同样，中国发展也将为世界特别是周边国家带来更多发展机遇。我们愿意也期待同各国分享发展机遇，共创亚洲美好未来。
To achieve this goal, China will increase cooperation with all other countries, especially its neighbors, and China's development will bring greater opportunities for the world, particularly its neighbors. We are ready to share these development opportunities with other countries in Asia and work with them to create a better future for Asia.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
岁月如梭，光阴荏苒。回顾中新关系发展历程，我们倍加怀念缔造中新关系的两位伟人，邓小平先生、李光耀先生。5年前我访问新加坡时，同李光耀先生一起在新加坡河畔为邓小平先生纪念碑揭幕。如今斯人已逝，他们的丰功伟绩永远值得我们缅怀。
How time flies! As we look back on the history of China-Singapore relations, we cherish all the more the memory of two great statesmen who forged this relationship, Mr. Deng Xiaoping and Mr. Lee Kuan Yew. Five years ago on another visit to Singapore, I joined Mr. Lee Kuan Yew in unveiling a commemorative marker in honor of Mr. Deng Xiaoping on the bank of the Singapore River. Even though both of them are no longer with us, their great achievements will always be remembered by us.
青年代表着希望、代表着未来。令人欣慰的是，中新老一辈领导人精心培育的中新友好合作之树如今已经枝繁叶茂、硕果累累。中新友好合作事业需要青年一代传承发扬，两国友谊的接力棒需要两国年轻一代接过来、跑下去。今年7月，几名新加坡“90后”大学生参加了2015“看中国·外国青年影像计划”，他们来到中国西北，用镜头记录现代中国，通过秦腔、兰州牛肉面、羊皮筏子等元素了解和传递中华文化。从中国来到新加坡国立大学深造的两名大学生则用一年时间拍摄了50个新加坡当地人物的梦想故事。相信在座的同学们身边还有很多这样的事例。
The youth represent hope and the future. I am glad to see that the saplings of friendship and cooperation between China and Singapore so carefully nurtured by past generations of leaders of the two countries have grown into luxuriant trees laden with fruits. The baton of China-Singapore friendship needs to be passed on to you, the younger generation of the two countries, and it is you who will carry forward this friendship. Last July, several Singaporean college students in their early 20s joined a "Looking China" program to learn about China through taking photographs, a program that took them to Northwest China. There, they captured images of modern China through camera lens and experienced and shared the Chinese culture with others by watching the local Qinqiang Opera, eating Lanzhou hand-pulled noodle and taking a river trip on sheepskin rafts. Two Chinese students studying at the National University of Singapore spent an entire year filming the personal stories and dreams of 50 Singaporeans. I am sure you know many similar anecdotes of such people-to-people exchanges.
希望中新两国青年发扬“不患人之不己知，患不知人也”的精神，加深对彼此国家历史文化的了解，加深对彼此人生追求的了解，互学互鉴，增进友谊，共当中新友谊的忠实继承者、积极参与者、热心奉献者，成为中新关系发展的生力军。
As a Chinese saying goes, instead of complaining that one's talents go unrecognized, one should learn to appreciate the wisdom of others. I hope the young people in both China and Singapore will learn more about the history and culture of both countries as well as each other's personal aspirations. Learn from each other, deepen your friendship, carry forward China-Singapore friendship, and be a new force driving the growth of China-Singapore relations. This is my hope for you.
老师们、同学们、女士们、先生们！
Faculty Members and Students, Ladies and Gentlemen,
展望未来，亚洲再次站到了引领历史发展的前列。我们生于斯、长于斯，前途命运维系于斯。中国愿同新加坡一道，愿同周边国家一道，愿同世界各国一道，携手开创全方位合作新局面，共建亚洲美好家园。
Looking ahead, I believe that Asia is once again taking the lead in promoting the development of history. Asia is our homeland, and is where our future lies. China stands ready to work with Singapore and other neighbors as well as all the other countries in the world to usher in a new era of all-round cooperation and turn Asia into our beautiful homeland.
谢谢各位。
Thank you!
109. 习近平联合国发展峰会演讲
谋共同永续发展 做合作共赢伙伴
——在联合国发展峰会上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
（2015年9月26日，纽约）
Towards a Mutually Beneficial Partnership for Sustainable Development
— Speech at the UN Sustainable Development Summit
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
New York, September 26, 2015
主席先生，各位同事：	、
Mr. Co-Chairs, Distinguished Colleagues,
很高兴出席今天的峰会。在联合国成立70周年之际，各国领导人齐聚纽约，共商发展大计，具有重要意义。	
It gives me great pleasure to attend today's summit. With the United Nations marking its 70th anniversary, this is a significant and timely opportunity for world leaders to get together in New York to chart the course for future development.
对各国人民而言，发展寄托着生存和希望，象征着尊严和权利。正是带着这个愿望，15年前，我们制定了千年发展目标，希望帮助亿万人民过上更好生活。	
Development bears on the hopes and the very survival of the peoples of all countries. It embodies the expression of their dignity and their rights. It is in such a context that we laid down the Millennium Development Goals 15 years ago in an effort to better the lives of hundreds of millions of people.
回首过去，我们经历了全球经济持续增长，也承受了国际金融危机严重冲击。我们见证了发展中国家的崛起，也面对着南北发展失衡的现实。我们既为11亿人民脱贫而深受鼓舞，也为8亿多人仍在挨饿而深为担忧。	
In the intervening years, we have witnessed both continued worldwide growth and severe consequences of the international financial crisis. We have seen both the sweeping rise of developing countries and the lingering imbalance between the North and the South. While elated at the fact that more than 1.1 billion people have since been raised from poverty, we cannot but feel deep concern that more than 800 million still go to bed every day with an empty stomach.
环顾世界，和平与发展仍然是当今时代两大主题。要解决好各种全球性挑战，包括最近发生在欧洲的难民危机，根本出路在于谋求和平、实现发展。面对重重挑战和道道难关，我们必须攥紧发展这把钥匙。唯有发展，才能消除冲突的根源。唯有发展，才能保障人民的基本权利。唯有发展，才能满足人民对美好生活的热切向往。	
At the global level, peace and development remain the dominant themes of the times. To properly address the range of global challenges we face, including the recent refugee crisis in Europe, there is no fundamental solution other than the pursuit of peace and development. Confronted by such a multiplicity of challenges and difficulties, we must hold fast to development as our master key, for only through development can we resolve the root cause of conflicts, safeguard the basic rights of the people, and meet the ardent hopes of people for a better future.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. Co-Chairs, Distinguished Colleagues,
本次峰会通过的2015年后发展议程，为全球发展描绘了新愿景，为国际发展合作提供了新机遇。我们应该以此为新起点，共同走出一条公平、开放、全面、创新的发展之路，努力实现各国共同发展。	
The Post-2015 Development Agenda adopted by this summit draws up a new blueprint for global development and provides fresh opportunities for international cooperation. We should take this as a new starting point, work out a course of equitable, open, all-round and innovation-driven development, and strive to realize the common development of all countries.
——我们要争取公平的发展，让发展机会更加均等。各国都应成为全球发展的参与者、贡献者、受益者。不能一个国家发展、其他国家不发展，一部分国家发展、另一部分国家不发展。各国能力和水平有差异，在同一目标下，应该承担共同但有区别的责任。要完善全球经济治理，提高发展中国家代表性和发言权，给予各国平等参与规则制定的权利。	
— We need to ensure equitable development for all. All countries should have equal rights as participants in, contributors to, and beneficiaries of global development. This must not be a privilege available to just one or to a small number of countries, and inaccessible to a large number of others. Countries may differ in their capacity for development and the progress they have made towards their goals. In spite of this, they have shared objectives, and should bear the common – if differentiated – levels of responsibility. It is important to improve global economic governance, increase the representation and the voice of developing countries, and give all countries equal rights to participate in international rule-making.
——我们要坚持开放的发展，让发展成果惠及各方。在经济全球化时代，各国要打开大门搞建设，促进生产要素在全球范围更加自由便捷地流动。各国要共同维护多边贸易体制，构建开放型经济，实现共商、共建、共享。要尊重彼此的发展选择，相互借鉴发展经验，让不同发展道路交汇在成功的彼岸，让发展成果为各国人民共享。	
— We need to ensure open development, to deliver its benefits to all parties. With the steady onward march of economic globalization, all countries should keep their doors wide open and allow factors of production to flow more freely and smoothly across the world. It is important for all countries to uphold the multilateral trading system, build an open economy, and come to share the benefits through mutual consultation and joint collaboration. We should respect each other's choice of path towards development, draw on each other's experience, and bring these different paths together at the point of success, thus furnishing the rich fruits of development to all peoples.
——我们要追求全面的发展，让发展基础更加坚实。发展的最终目的是为了人民。在消除贫困、保障民生的同时，要维护社会公平正义，保证人人享有发展机遇、享有发展成果。要努力实现经济、社会、环境协调发展，实现人与社会、人与自然和谐相处。	
— We need to ensure all-round development to make the foundations more solid. Development will ultimately serve the people. While striving to eliminate poverty and improve standards of living, it is important for us to uphold equality and social justice and ensure that everyone has access to the opportunities and benefits of development. Efforts must be made to balance the development of the economy, society, and the environment, and achieve harmonious coexistence between man and society and between man and nature.
——我们要促进创新的发展，让发展潜力充分释放。创新带来生机，创新产生动力。发展中的问题只有通过发展才能解决。各国要以改革创新激发发展潜力、增强增长动力，培育新的核心竞争力。	
— We need to ensure innovation-driven development to release the potential to the greatest extent possible. Innovation is a vibrant driver. Problems arising in the process of development can only be resolved through further development. All countries should look to reform and innovation for ways to bring out their potential, build stronger engines for growth, and hone their competitive edge to the maximum.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. Co-Chairs, Distinguished Colleagues,
2015年后发展议程是一份高标准的任务单，也是一份沉甸甸的承诺书。“一分部署，九分落实。”我倡议，国际社会加强合作，共同落实2015年后发展议程，努力实现合作共赢。
The Post-2015 Development Agenda is an ambitious list of deliverables that carries with it our solemn commitment. It is often said that the worth of any plan lies in its implementation. I therefore call on the international community to redouble its collective efforts to achieve the joint implementation of the Post-2015 Development Agenda and work hard to realize our goal.
第一，增强各国发展能力。发展归根到底要靠本国自身努力。中国人讲：“量腹而受，量身而衣。”各国要根据自身禀赋特点，制定适合本国国情的发展战略。国际社会要帮助发展中国家加强能力建设，根据他们的实际需求，有针对性地提供支持和帮助。	
First, to build up capacity for development. Development, in the final analysis, is the job of individual countries. We Chinese say, "Eat according to the size of one's stomach and dress according to the size of one's figure." It is therefore necessary for each country to formulate its own development strategies that fit its strengths and national conditions. The international community has a duty to help developing countries grow their capacity and to provide them with support and assistance tailored to their actual needs.
第二，改善国际发展环境。和平与发展相辅相成。各国要共同维护国际和平，以和平促进发展，以发展巩固和平。发展还需要良好外部制度环境，国际金融机构要加快治理改革，多边开发机构要增加发展资源。	
Second, to improve the international environment for development. Peace and development go hand in hand. Countries should work together to maintain international peace, promoting development with peace and securing peace through development. A sound external institutional environment is required to sustain development. International financial institutions therefore need to step up the reform of their governance, and multilateral development agencies need to increase their supply of resources.
第三，优化发展伙伴关系。发达国家应该及时兑现承诺、履行义务，国际社会应该坚持南北合作主渠道地位，深化南南合作和三方合作，支持私营部门等利益攸关方在伙伴关系中发挥更大作用。	
Third, to update the partnership for development. Developed countries should honor their commitments and live up to their obligations in a timely manner. The international community, while maintaining the role of South-North cooperation as the main channel, should work to reinforce South-South and tripartite cooperation, and encourage the private sector and other stakeholders to play an even larger role in these partnerships.
第四，健全发展协调机制。各国要加强宏观经济政策协调，避免负面溢出效应。区域组织要加快一体化进程，通过域内优势互补提升整体竞争力。联合国要继续发挥领导作用。
Fourth, to strengthen the coordination mechanisms for development. Countries need to step up coordination of their macroeconomic policies to avoid as far as possible negative spillover effects. Regional organizations should accelerate their integration and invigorate their overall competitiveness by exploiting intra-regional complementary advantages. The United Nations must continue to fulfill its leadership role.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. Co-Chairs, Distinguished Colleagues,
改革开放30多年来，中国立足自身国情，走出了一条中国特色发展道路。中国基本实现了千年发展目标，贫困人口减少了4.39亿，在教育、卫生、妇女等领域取得显著成就。中国发展不仅增进了13亿多中国人的福祉，也有力促进了全球发展事业。	
Over the past 30 years and more since China inaugurated its reform and opening up, our country has followed a development path with distinct Chinese characteristics – one that was chosen in the light of our prevailing national conditions. Through our success in lifting 439 million people out of poverty and the remarkable progress we have made in areas such as education, health and development of women, we have essentially realized our Millennium Development Goals. China's development has not only improved the well-being of the 1.3 billion-plus Chinese people, but also given a strong boost to the global cause.
60多年来，中国积极参与国际发展合作，共向166个国家和国际组织提供了近4000亿元人民币援助，派遣60多万援助人员，其中700多名中国好儿女为他国发展献出了宝贵生命。
Over the past six decades, China has taken an active part in international cooperation. We have provided 166 countries and international organizations with nearly RMB400 billion worth of development assistance and dispatched over 600,000 aid workers, more than 700 of whom have laid down their precious lives in aiding the development of other countries.
面向未来，中国将继续秉持义利相兼、以义为先的原则，同各国一道为实现2015年后发展议程作出努力。为此，我宣布：	
Looking to the future, China will continue to maintain an ethical balance between justice and its own interests by putting justice before such interests. We will join our own efforts with those of other countries in a concerted drive to realize the Post-2015 Development Agenda. To this end, I wish to announce the following:
——中国将设立“南南合作援助基金”，首期提供20亿美元，支持发展中国家落实2015年后发展议程。	
— China will establish an assistance fund for South-South cooperation, with an initial pledge of US$2 billion to support developing countries in their implementation of the Post-2015 Development Agenda.
——中国将继续增加对最不发达国家投资，力争2030年达到120亿美元。	
— China will continue to increase investment in the least-developed countries, aiming to attain a level of US$12 billion by 2030.
——中国将免除对有关最不发达国家、内陆发展中国家、小岛屿发展中国家截至2015年底到期未还的政府间无息贷款债务。	
— China will write off the debt on outstanding intergovernmental interest-free loans due by the end of 2015 owed by designated least-developed countries, landlocked developing countries, and small island developing countries.
——中国将设立国际发展知识中心，同各国一道研究和交流适合各自国情的发展理论和发展实践。	
— China will establish an international development knowledge center for studying and exchanging between countries on the theories and practice of development best-suited to their respective national conditions.
——中国倡议探讨构建全球能源互联网，推动以清洁和绿色方式满足全球电力需求。	
— China will propose a discussion on establishing a global energy internet to facilitate efforts to meet global power demand with clean and green alternatives.
中国也愿意同有关各方一道，继续推进“一带一路”建设，推动亚洲基础设施投资银行和金砖国家新开发银行早日投入运营、发挥作用，为发展中国家经济增长和民生改善贡献力量。
China is also ready and willing to work with other stakeholders to make rapid progress on the implementation of the Belt and Road Initiative,* to quickly render the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the BRICS New Development Bank operational, and to contribute to the economic growth of the developing countries and the well-being of their peoples.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. Co-Chairs, Distinguished Colleagues,
中国郑重承诺，以落实2015年后发展议程为己任，团结协作，推动全球发展事业不断向前
We, the people of China, make this solemn pledge: to maintain our commitment to implementation of the Post-2015 Development Agenda as our bounden duty, to work together with the world as one, and to strive for continued progress in global development.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
81 习近平在二十国集团工商峰会开幕式上的主旨演讲
中国发展新起点 全球增长新蓝图
（2016年9月3日，杭州）
A New Starting Point for China's Development
A New Blueprint for Global Growth
Hangzhou, 3 September 2016
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
下午好！很高兴同大家在杭州相聚。明天，二十国集团领导人峰会就要拉开帷幕。国际社会期待着这次峰会，工商、智库、劳动、妇女、青年等社会各界也期待着这次峰会。大家目标高度一致，那就是推动杭州峰会取得丰硕成果。	
Good afternoon! I am so glad to have all of you with us here in Hangzhou. The G20 Summit will begin tomorrow, an event much anticipated by the international community as well as the business community, think tanks, and the labor, women and youth organizations. And all of us share one and the same goal, that is, to make the Hangzhou Summit deliver fruitful outcomes.
杭州是中国的一个历史文化重镇和商贸中心。千百年来，从白居易到苏东坡，从西湖到大运河，杭州的悠久历史和文化传说引人入胜。杭州是创新活力之城，电子商务蓬勃发展，在杭州点击鼠标，联通的是整个世界。杭州也是生态文明之都，山明水秀，晴好雨奇，浸透着江南韵味，凝结着世代匠心。	
Hangzhou is a renowned historical and cultural city and a center of business and trade in China. Famous for Bai Juyi, a leading Chinese poet in the Tang Dynasty and Su Dongpo, a popular poet in the Song Dynasty who spent time in Hangzhou, as well as the West Lake and the Grand Canal, Hangzhou has a fascinating history and rich and enchanting cultural heritage. Hangzhou is also an innovative and vibrant city with booming e-commerce. Just click the mouse in Hangzhou, and you connect the whole world. Hangzhou is also a leader in ecological conservation. Its green hills and clear lakes and rivers delight the eye on sunny days and present a special view on rainy days. Hangzhou is imbued with a charm unique to the south of the Yangtze River that has been fostered over many generations.
我曾在浙江工作了6个年头，熟悉这里的山水草木、风土人情，参与和见证了这里的发展。在中国，像杭州这样的城市有很多，在过去几十年经历了大发展、大变化，许许多多普通家庭用勤劳的双手改变了自己的生活。这一点一滴的变化，集合起来就是磅礴的力量，推动着中国发展进步，折射出中国改革开放的伟大进程。	
I spent six years working in Zhejiang Province and was personally involved in its development endeavor. So I am familiar with everything here, its land and its people. In China, there are many cities like Hangzhou which have gone through great changes and achieved tremendous development over the decades. Millions of ordinary Chinese families have changed their lives through hard work. When added up, these small changes have become a powerful force driving China’s development and progress. What we see here in Hangzhou showcases what has been achieved in the great course of reform and opening-up China has embarked upon.
——这是探索前行的进程。一个13亿多人口的大国实现现代化，在人类历史上没有先例可循。中国的发展注定要走一条属于自己的道路。我们“摸着石头过河”，不断深化改革开放，不断探索前进，开创和发展了中国特色社会主义。	
― This is a course of blazing a new trail. Modernizing a big country with a population of more than 1.3 billion is an endeavor never undertaken in the history of mankind, and this means China must pursue its own path of development. What we have done is, as a Chinese saying puts it, “crossing the river by feeling for stones”. We have deepened reform and opening-up, broken new ground and forged ahead, and established and developed socialism with distinctive Chinese features.
——这是真抓实干的进程。我们紧紧抓住经济建设这个中心不放松，与时俱进，开拓创新，靠着拼劲、闯劲、干劲，靠着钉钉子精神，把中国建成世界第二大经济体、最大货物贸易国、第三大对外直接投资国，人均国内生产总值接近8000美元。	
― This is a course of delivering tangible outcomes. We have pursued economic development as the top priority and never slackened our efforts. We have moved with the times and taken bold initiatives. Thanks to our perseverance, resolve and dedication, and the spirit of driving the nail, we have succeeded in turning China into the world's second biggest economy, the biggest trader of goods and the third largest direct overseas investor, and lifted China’s per capita GDP to close to 8,000 US dollars.
——这是共同富裕的进程。发展为了人民、发展依靠人民、发展成果由人民共享，这是中国推进改革开放和社会主义现代化建设的根本目的。改革开放以来，中国有7亿多人口摆脱贫困，13亿多人民的生活质量和水平大幅度提升，用几十年时间完成了其他国家几百年走过的发展历程。	
― This is a course of achieving common prosperity. Development is for the people; it should be pursued by the people and its outcomes should be shared by the people. This is what China's reform, opening-up and socialist modernization drive are all about. Thanks to this reform and opening-up endeavor, China has lifted over 700 million people out of poverty and significantly made life better for its 1.3 billion-plus people. In pursuing development, we have accomplished just in a few decades what has taken other countries several hundred years to achieve.
——这是中国走向世界、世界走向中国的进程。我们奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持对外开放的基本国策，敞开大门搞建设，从大规模引进来到大踏步走出去，积极推动建设更加公正合理的国际秩序，中国同外部世界的互动持续加深，中国的朋友遍布世界。	
― This is a course of China and the world embracing each other. We have pursued an independent foreign policy of peace and a fundamental policy of opening-up. We have endeavored to develop in an open environment, starting by introducing large scale overseas investment and then going global with big strides. We have been actively involved in building a fairer and more equitable international order. China's interaction with the outside world has deepened. And indeed, we have friends all over the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
改革开放38年过去，弹指一挥间。今天，随着中国经济体量的增大以及同世界的合作不断加深，中国经济走向受到外界关注。很多人都关心，中国经济能否实现持续稳定增长？中国能否把改革开放推进下去？中国能否避免陷入“中等收入陷阱”？	
Thirty-eight years of reform and opening-up have unfolded rapidly. Today, as China's economy grows in size and its cooperation with the world deepens, the prospect of China’s economy has drawn keen international attention. Many people wonder whether China can maintain sustainable and steady growth, whether China can continue its reform and opening-up, and whether China can avoid falling into the "middle income trap".
行胜于言。中国用实际行动对这些问题作出了回答。今年年初，中国出台了国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划纲要，围绕全面建成小康社会奋斗目标，针对发展不平衡、不协调、不可持续等突出问题，强调要牢固树立和坚决贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念。	
Actions speak louder than words. China has answered these questions with actions. Early this year, China drew up the outlines of the 13th five-year plan for economic and social development. These outlines call for implementing the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, addressing acute challenges of uneven, uncoordinated and unsustainable development, and ultimately achieving a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
今天的中国，已经站在新的历史起点上。这个新起点，就是中国全面深化改革、增加经济社会发展新动力的新起点，就是中国适应经济发展新常态、转变经济发展方式的新起点，就是中国同世界深度互动、向世界深度开放的新起点。我们有信心、有能力保持经济中高速增长，继续在实现自身发展的同时为世界带来更多发展机遇。	
China has reached a new historical starting point. It is a new starting point for China to deepen reform across the board and foster new drivers of economic and social development. It is a new starting point for China to adapt its economy to a new normal and transform its growth model. It is a new starting point for China to further integrate itself into the world and open itself wider to the world. We have the confidence and ability to maintain medium-high rate of growth and deliver more development opportunities to the world while ensuring our own development.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移全面深化改革，开拓更好发展前景。中国经济发展进入新常态，这是中国经济向形态更高级、分工更优化、结构更合理阶段演进的必经过程。要在新常态下保持经济中高速增长，必须依靠改革。因循守旧没有出路，畏缩不前坐失良机。中国改革的方向已经明确、不会动摇；中国改革的步伐将坚定向前、不会放慢。	
― Proceeding from this new starting point, we will steadfastly deepen reform in an all-round way and open up brighter prospects of development. China's economic development has entered a new normal, a stage it cannot bypass if China is to upgrade its economy and make it better structured. Reform is crucial to maintaining medium-high rate of growth under the new normal. Sticking to convention will get us nowhere. Fear to advance will only result in losing the opportunity. China's goal of reform has been set and we will not deviate from it. China will take sure and firm steps in advancing reform and will not slow down its pace.
中国改革已经进入攻坚期和深水区，我们将以壮士断腕的勇气、凤凰涅槃的决心，敢于向积存多年的顽瘴痼疾开刀，敢于触及深层次利益关系和矛盾，把改革进行到底。我们将继续推进供给侧结构性改革，解决好当前经济发展中的主要矛盾，通过优化要素配置和调整产业结构提高供给体系质量和效率，激发市场活力，促进协调发展。我们将继续创新体制机制、突破利益固化藩篱，全面推进依法治国，更好发挥市场在资源配置中的决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用。	
China's reform has entered the deep water zone where tough challenges must be met. We have the resolve to make painful self-adjustments and tackle problems that have built up over many years, particularly underlying issues and entrenched interests and carry reform through to the end. We will continue to carry out supply-side structural reform, resolve major problems in economic development and improve the performance of the supply system by optimizing factors allocation and adjusting industrial structure. With these efforts, we can energize the market and achieve coordinated development. We will continue to explore new institutional mechanism, break through the resistance of vested interests, exercise law-based governance and better leverage both the decisive role of the market in resource allocation and the role of the government.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移实施创新驱动发展战略，释放更强增长动力。抓住科技创新就抓住了发展的牛鼻子。我们清醒认识到，中国经济发展不少领域大而不强、大而不优，长期以来主要依靠资源、资本、劳动力等要素投入支撑经济增长和规模扩张的方式已不可持续，中国发展正面临着动力转换、方式转变、结构调整的繁重任务。建设创新型国家和世界科技强国，是中国发展的迫切要求和必由之路。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will pursue an innovation-driven development strategy to create stronger growth drivers. Scientific and technological innovation holds the key to development. We are keenly aware that many sectors of China's economy are not strong or competitive enough despite their big sizes. Over the years, they have depended on input of resources, capital and labor force to achieve growth and expand scale. But this model is no longer sustainable. China now faces the challenging task of changing its growth drivers and growth model and adjusting its economic structure. To make China an innovative country and a leader in science and technology is what China must do now in pursuing development.
我们正在实施创新驱动发展战略，发挥创新第一动力的作用，努力实现从量的增长向质的提升转变。我们将推广发展理念、体制机制、商业模式等全方位、多层次、宽领域的大创新，在推动发展的内生动力和活力上来一个根本性转变。我们将力争在重大项目、重点方向率先突破，积极牵头实施国际大科学计划和大科学工程。我们将深入研究和解决经济和产业发展急需的科技问题，围绕促进转方式调结构、建设现代产业体系、培育战略性新兴产业、发展现代服务业等方面需求推动科技成果转移转化，推动产业和产品向价值链中高端跃升，塑造更多依靠创新驱动、更多发挥先发优势的引领性发展。	
We are implementing the innovation-driven development strategy so as to leverage the role of innovation as the primary growth driver and make growth quality based rather than quantity based. We will promote all-dimensional, multi-tiered and wide-ranging changes in principles guiding development, institutional structures and business models so as to bring about a fundamental transformation of the forces driving development and create new impetus for it. We will strive to make breakthroughs in major projects and priority areas and take the lead in undertaking major international scientific programs and projects. We will conduct research on and resolve pressing scientific and technological issues holding back economic and industrial development. We will speed up the commercialization of R&D achievements to meet the need of shifting the growth model, adjusting economic structure, building a modern industrial system, fostering strategic emerging industries and developing a modern service industry. In short, we aim to move our industries and products up to the medium-high end of the value chain and create more innovation-driven growth areas with first-mover advantages that will lead development.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移推动绿色发展，谋求更佳质量效益。我多次说过，绿水青山就是金山银山，保护环境就是保护生产力，改善环境就是发展生产力。这个朴素的道理正得到越来越多人们的认同。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will promote green development to achieve better economic performance. I have said for many times that green mountains and clear water are as good as mountains of gold and silver. To protect the environment is to protect productivity, and to improve the environment is to boost productivity. This simple fact is increasingly recognized by people.
我们将毫不动摇实施可持续发展战略，坚持绿色低碳循环发展，坚持节约资源和保护环境的基本国策。我们推动绿色发展，也是为了主动应对气候变化和产能过剩问题。今后5年，中国单位国内生产总值用水量、能耗、二氧化碳排放量将分别下降23%、15%、18%。我们要建设天蓝、地绿、水清的美丽中国，让老百姓在宜居的环境中享受生活，切实感受到经济发展带来的生态效益。	
We will unwaveringly pursue a strategy of sustainable development and stay committed to green, low-carbon and circular development and China's fundamental policy of conserving resources and protecting the environment. In promoting green development, we also aim to address climate change and overcapacity. In the next five years, China's water and energy consumption as well as CO2 emission per unit of GDP will be cut down by 23%, 15% and 18% respectively. We will make China a beautiful country with blue sky, green vegetation and clear rivers, so that the people will enjoy life in a livable environment and the ecological benefits created by economic development.
从2016年开始，我们正大力推进供给侧结构性改革，主动调节供求关系，要用5年时间再压减粗钢产能1亿至1.5亿吨，用3至5年时间再退出煤炭产能5亿吨左右、减量重组5亿吨左右。这是我们从自身长远发展出发，从去产能、调结构、稳增长出发，自主采取的行动。中国在去产能方面，力度最大，举措最实，说到就会做到。	
Starting from 2016, we have been vigorously advancing supply-side structural reform and taking the initiative to adjust the relationship between supply and demand. We will cut down production capacity of crude steel by another 100 million to 150 million tons in the next five years, close more coal mines with production capacity of around 500 million tons and cut production capacity of around 500 million tons through coal mine restructuring in three to five years. This is an initiative that we are taking to cut excess capacity, adjust the economic structure and pursue steady growth so as to sustain long-term development. China has taken the most robust and solid measures in cutting excess capacity and we will honor our commitment with actions.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移推进公平共享，增进更多民众福祉。民惟邦本，本固邦宁。坚持以人民为中心，就要扎扎实实体现在经济社会发展各方面各环节。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will promote equity and sharing of development outcomes to deliver more benefits to the people. The people are the foundation of a country and only when the people lead a good life can the country thrive. We need to be people-oriented, a principle that we should follow in everything we do in advancing economic and social development.
我们将顺应人民对美好生活的向往，不断提高人民生活质量和水平，健全公共服务体系，扩大中等收入者比重。特别是要加大对困难群众精准帮扶力度，在2020年前实现现行标准下5700多万农村贫困人口全部脱贫，贫困县全部摘帽。改革开放以来，中国使7亿多人摆脱贫困，占全球减贫人口的70%以上，为世界减贫事业作出了重大贡献。中国将继续为全球反贫困作出贡献。我们将更加注重公平公正，在做大发展蛋糕的同时分好蛋糕，从人民最关心最直接最现实的利益问题出发，让百姓有更多成就感和获得感。	
We will meet the people's aspirations for a better life, raise their living standards and the quality of their lives, improve the public services system and enlarge the middle-income group. In particular, we will provide stronger and more targeted support to those living in difficulty, so that the over 57 million poor rural population below the current poverty line will all be lifted out of poverty and poverty will be alleviated in all poor counties by 2020. Since the beginning of reform and opening-up, China has lifted more than 700 million people out of poverty which accounted for over 70% of the global population living in poverty, thus making significant contribution to poverty reduction worldwide. And we will continue to contribute to the global fight against poverty. With more attention paid to equity and fairness, we will make the pie bigger and ensure that people get a fair share of it. We will resolve the most pressing problems affecting the immediate interests of the people to their satisfaction.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移扩大对外开放，实现更广互利共赢。奉行互利共赢的开放战略，不断创造更全面、更深入、更多元的对外开放格局，是中国的战略选择。中国对外开放不会停滞，更不会走回头路。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will open up wider to achieve greater mutual benefit and win-win outcomes. To pursue a win-win strategy of opening-up and open up China in a more comprehensive, profound and diversified way is a strategic choice of ours. China’s opening-up will not stall, still less will it reverse course.
我们将继续深入参与经济全球化进程，支持多边贸易体制。我们将加大放宽外商投资准入，提高便利化程度，促进公平开放竞争，全力营造优良营商环境。同时，我们将加快同有关国家商签自由贸易协定和投资协定，推进国内高标准自由贸易试验区建设。在有序开展人民币汇率市场化改革、逐步开放国内资本市场的同时，我们将继续推动人民币走出去，提高金融业国际化水平。	
We will continue to be fully involved in economic globalization and support the multilateral trading regime. We will expand access for foreign investment, facilitate such investment to promote fair and open competition and create a sound business environment. We will also accelerate negotiation on FTAs and investment treaties with relevant countries and the development of high-standard pilot free trade zones in China. While carrying out market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate in an orderly manner and phasing in the opening of domestic capital market, we will continue efforts to make the RMB an international currency and further internationalize China's financial sector.
中国的发展得益于国际社会，也愿为国际社会提供更多公共产品。我提出“一带一路”倡议，旨在同沿线各国分享中国发展机遇，实现共同繁荣。丝绸之路经济带一系列重点项目和经济走廊建设已经取得重要进展，21世纪海上丝绸之路建设正在同步推进。我们倡导创建的亚洲基础设施投资银行，已经开始在区域基础设施建设方面发挥积极作用。	
China's development has benefited from the international community, and we are ready to provide more public goods to the international community. I have proposed the initiative of building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road to share China's development opportunities with countries along the Belt and Road and achieve common prosperity. Major progress has been made in launching key projects and building the economic corridors of the Silk Road Economic Belt, and the building of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is well underway. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank initiated by China has already started its positive role in regional infrastructure development.
我想特别指出，中国倡导的新机制新倡议，不是为了另起炉灶，更不是为了针对谁，而是对现有国际机制的有益补充和完善，目标是实现合作共赢、共同发展。中国对外开放，不是要一家唱独角戏，而是要欢迎各方共同参与；不是要谋求势力范围，而是要支持各国共同发展；不是要营造自己的后花园，而是要建设各国共享的百花园。	
Here, I wish to stress that the new mechanisms and initiatives launched by China are not intended to reinvent the wheels or target any other country. Rather, they aim to complement and improve the current international mechanisms to achieve win-win cooperation and common development. China's opening drive is not a one-man show. Rather, it is an invitation open to all. It is a pursuit not to establish China's own sphere of influence, but to support common development of all countries. It is meant to build not China's own backyard garden, but a garden shared by all countries.
我们落实上述改革发展举措的决心是坚定的。这些举措已经初见成效。今年上半年，中国经济增长6.7%，产业升级和结构调整步伐加快，最终消费支出对国内生产总值的贡献率达到73.4%，第三产业增加值占到国内生产总值的54.1%，居民收入稳定增长，城镇新增就业717万人。可以相信，中国的发展前景一定会越来越好，对世界的贡献一定会越来越大！	
We are firm in our resolve to implement the above-mentioned reform and development measures; and they have indeed worked. In the first half of this year, China's GDP grew by 6.7%, its industrial upgrading and structural adjustment picked up pace, the final consumption expenditure contributed 73.4% to GDP, and the added value of the tertiary industry took up 54.1% of GDP. Household income grew steadily, and 7.17 million urban jobs were created. We have reasons to believe that China will embrace even better prospects and make still greater contribution to the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
当前，世界经济在深度调整中曲折复苏，正处于新旧增长动能转换的关键时期。上一轮科技和产业革命提供的动能面临消退，新一轮增长动能尚在孕育。现在，保护主义抬头，国际贸易和投资低迷，多边贸易体制发展面临瓶颈，区域贸易安排丛生，导致规则碎片化。地缘政治因素错综复杂，政治安全冲突和动荡、难民危机、气候变化、恐怖主义等地区热点和全球性挑战，对世界经济的影响不容忽视。	
The world economy is now in profound adjustments and moving along a twisted path to recovery. It stands at a crucial juncture where new growth drivers are taking the place of old ones. The dynamism provided by the last round of scientific and industrial revolution is waning while new impetus for growth is still in the making. Currently, protectionism is rising; global trade and investment are sluggish; the multilateral trading regime faces bottlenecks in development, and the emergence of various regional trade arrangements have led to fragmentation of rules. Complex geopolitical factors and regional hot-spot issues as well as global challenges such as political and security conflicts and turmoil, refugee crisis, climate change and terrorism have all affected the world economy with consequences that cannot be overlooked.
面对当前世界经济的复杂形势和风险挑战，国际社会对二十国集团、对杭州峰会抱有很高期待。在去年二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会上，我提出要对世界经济把准脉、开好方。中方希望同各方一道，推动杭州峰会开出一剂标本兼治、综合施策的药方，推动世界经济走上强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长之路。	
Against such complex situation as well as risks and challenges facing the world economy, the international community has high expectations on the G20 and the Hangzhou Summit. At the G20 Antalya Summit last year, I proposed that we make an accurate assessment of the health of the world economy and give right prescriptions. China will work with other parties to ensure that the Hangzhou Summit comes up with an integrated prescription to address both the symptoms and root causes so that the world economy could move along a path of strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth.
第一，建设创新型世界经济，开辟增长源泉。创新是从根本上打开增长之锁的钥匙。以互联网为核心的新一轮科技和产业革命蓄势待发，人工智能、虚拟现实等新技术日新月异，虚拟经济与实体经济的结合，将给人们的生产方式和生活方式带来革命性变化。这种变化不会一蹴而就，也不会一帆风顺，需要各国合力推动，在充分放大和加速其正面效应的同时，把可能出现的负面影响降到最低。	
First, we need to build an innovative world economy to generate new drivers of growth. Innovation holds the key to fundamentally unleashing the growth potential. The new round of scientific and industrial revolution with Internet at its core is gathering momentum, and new technologies such as artificial intelligence and virtual reality are developing by leaps and bounds. The combination of the virtual economy and the real economy will bring revolutionary changes to our way of work and way of life. Such changes will not take place overnight or be problem-free. They require all countries to work together to maximize and quicken their positive effects while minimizing the potential negative impacts.
中方把创新增长方式设定为杭州峰会重点议题，推动制定《二十国集团创新增长蓝图》，目的就是要向创新要动力，向改革要活力，把握创新、新科技革命和产业变革、数字经济的历史性机遇，提升世界经济中长期增长潜力。这是二十国集团首次围绕创新采取行动，我们要把各国实施创新政策的力量汇集一处，做到理念上有共识、行动上有计划、机制上有保障。我们要针对全球经济增长低迷的突出问题，在宏观经济政策上进行创新，把财政货币和结构性改革政策有效组合起来。	
China has made "breaking a new path for growth" one of the major agenda items of the Hangzhou Summit and has worked for the formulation of a G20 Blueprint on Innovative Growth. What we want to achieve is to seek impetus through innovation and vitality through reform. We need to seize the historic opportunity presented by innovation, new scientific and technological revolution, industrial transformation and digital economy to increase medium- and long-term growth potential of the world economy. This will be the first time that the G20 takes action on innovation. It is important for us to pool together the strength of innovation-oriented policies of individual countries and make sure that our action is guided with conceptual consensus, and implemented according to concrete action plans with sufficient institutional guarantee. In light of the pronounced issue of lackluster global economic growth, we need to innovate our macroeconomic policies and effectively combine fiscal and monetary policies with structural reform policies.
第二，建设开放型世界经济，拓展发展空间。世界经济发展的历史证明，开放带来进步，封闭导致落后。重回以邻为壑的老路，不仅无法摆脱自身危机和衰退，而且会收窄世界经济共同空间，导致“双输”局面。	
Second, we need to build an open world economy to expand the scope of development. The path of world economic development shows that openness brings progress and isolation leads to backwardness. To repeat the beggar-thy-neighbor approach will not help any country get out of the crisis or recession. It only narrows the space for common development in the world economy and will lead to a "lose-lose" scenario.
“轻关易道，通商宽农。”这是建设开放型世界经济的应有之义。中方把贸易和投资摆上二十国集团重要议程。我们推动二十国集团加强贸易和投资机制建设，制定全球贸易增长战略和全球投资指导原则，巩固多边贸易体制，重申反对保护主义承诺。我们希望通过这些举措，为各国发展营造更大市场和空间，重振贸易和投资这两大引擎。	
According to the teaching of Chinese classics, "The governance of a country should be based on simple customs procedures, improved infrastructure, convenience for business transactions and preferential agricultural policies." What it implies is the importance of building an open world economy. China has put trade and investment high on the G20 agenda. We support the G20’s efforts as it endeavors to strengthen institution-building in trade and investment, formulate the strategy for global trade growth as well as the guiding principles for global investment policy-making, consolidate the multilateral trading regime and reaffirm its commitment against protectionism. We hope that these measures will open up greater market and scope for the development of individual countries and help revitalize trade and investment, the two major engines of growth.
第三，建设联动型世界经济，凝聚互动合力。在经济全球化时代，各国发展环环相扣，一荣俱荣，一损俱损。没有哪一个国家可以独善其身，协调合作是必然选择。我们要在世界经济共振中实现联动发展。	
Third, we need to build an interconnected world economy to forge interactive synergy. In the age of economic globalization, countries are closely linked in their development and they all rise and fall together. No country could seek development on its own; and the one sure path is through coordination and cooperation. We need to realize interconnected development by promoting common development of the world economy.
我们应该加强政策规则的联动，一方面通过宏观经济政策协调放大正面外溢效应，减少负面外部影响，另一方面倡导交流互鉴，解决制度、政策、标准不对称问题。我们应该夯实基础设施的联动，中方发起全球基础设施互联互通联盟倡议，推动多边开发银行发表联合愿景声明，加大对基础设施项目的资金投入和智力支持，以加速全球基础设施互联互通进程。我们应该增进利益共赢的联动，推动构建和优化全球价值链，扩大各方参与，打造全球增长共赢链。	
We need to increase the interconnection of our rules and policies. We need to maximize the positive spillovers and minimize the negative external impacts through coordination of our macroeconomic policies. At the same time, we also need to encourage mutual learning to address asymmetries in systems, policies and standards. We need to enhance the interconnection of our infrastructure. China has put forward the global infrastructure connectivity alliance initiative to encourage multilateral development banks to adopt joint declaration of aspirations and give greater funds and intellectual support to infrastructure projects to speed up the process of global infrastructure connectivity. We need to promote win-win interconnection, foster and improve the global value chain and increase the participation of parties concerned so as to create a chain of win-win global growth.
第四，建设包容型世界经济，夯实共赢基础。消除贫困和饥饿，推动包容和可持续发展，不仅是国际社会的道义责任，也能释放出不可估量的有效需求。据有关统计，现在世界基尼系数已经达到0.7左右，超过了公认的0.6“危险线”，必须引起我们的高度关注。同时，全球产业结构调整给不同产业和群体带来了冲击。我们要正视和妥善处理这一问题，努力让经济全球化更具包容性。	
Fourth, we need to build an inclusive world economy to strengthen the foundation for win-win outcomes. We need to eradicate poverty and hunger and advance inclusive and sustainable development. This is not just a moral responsibility of the international community. It also helps unleash immeasurable effective demand. According to relevant statistics, the world's Gini coefficient has reached around 0.7, higher than the recognized alarm level which stands at 0.6. This is something we must pay great attention to. At the same time, global industrial restructuring has had its impact on different industries and communities. We need to face this issue squarely and properly handle it in order to make economic globalization more inclusive.
为实现上述目标，今年二十国集团首次把发展问题置于全球宏观政策框架核心位置，首次就落实2030年可持续发展议程制定行动计划，首次就支持非洲国家和最不发达国家工业化开展合作，具有开创性意义。各方一致承诺推动气候变化《巴黎协定》尽快生效。我们还就能源可及性、能效、可再生能源、创业制定共同行动计划，加强粮食安全和农业合作。我们关心不同阶层和群体特别是困难群众的需求，推动各国讨论公共管理和再分配政策调整。	
To realize the above goal, this year's G20 has, for the first time, put the issue of development front and center of the global macro policy framework. The first action plan has been formulated for implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and for the first time, cooperation is being carried out to support African countries and LDCs in their industrialization. All these are moves of pioneering significance. The parties have all committed themselves to working for an early entry into force of the Paris Agreement on climate change. We have also formulated joint action plans on energy accessibility, energy efficiency, renewable energy and entrepreneurship, and have strengthened cooperation on food security and agriculture. We care for the needs of different social strata and communities, especially the needy, and encourage discussions among countries concerned on public administration and adjustment of redistribution policies.
我们希望向国际社会传递这样一个信号：二十国集团不仅属于二十个成员，也属于全世界。我们的目标是让增长和发展惠及所有国家和人民，让各国人民特别是发展中国家人民的日子都一天天好起来！	
We hope to convey a message to the international community that the G20 works for the interest of not just its 20 members, but the whole world. We will work to ensure that growth and development benefit all countries and peoples and that the livelihood of all people, especially those in developing countries, will get better day by day.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
一个行动胜过一打纲领。二十国集团成员应该同国际社会一道坚定信念、立即行动，从以下方面作出努力。	
One action counts more than a dozen programs. I believe G20 members should join other members of international community and act immediately and in good faith in the following aspects:
第一，共同维护和平稳定的国际环境。历史一再证明，没有和平就没有发展，没有稳定就没有繁荣。各国安全紧密相关，没有哪个国家可以独善其身，也没有哪个国家可以包打天下。抛弃过时的冷战思维，树立共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观是当务之急。我们呼吁各国珍惜难能可贵的和平和安宁，为维护全球和地区稳定发挥建设性作用。各国都应该坚持联合国宪章宗旨和原则，坚持多边主义，通过对话协商解决分歧和争端，寻求而不是破坏共识，化解而不是制造矛盾，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。	
First, we can work together to build a peaceful and stable international environment. History has proven time and again that without peace, there will be no development and without stability, there will be no prosperity. Countries are all closely linked in their security. No country can develop solely on its own or resolve all problems without working with others. It is important to reject the outdated Cold War mentality and build a new concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We call on all countries to cherish the hard-won peace and tranquility and play a constructive role in maintaining global and regional stability. All countries should uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, adhere to multilateralism, settle disagreements and disputes through dialogue and consultation, seek consensus and dissolve tensions rather than doing the opposite and make the international order more just and equitable.
和衷共济、和合共生是中华民族的历史基因，也是东方文明的精髓。中国坚定不移走和平发展道路。国强必霸的逻辑不适用，穷兵黩武的道路走不通。中国是联合国安理会常任理事国中派遣维和人员最多的国家，不久前在马里和南苏丹牺牲的联合国维和人员中就有中国人民的优秀儿子。我们将继续履行好国际义务，始终做世界和平的建设者和维护者。
To seek harmony and coexistence is in the genes of the Chinese nation throughout history. It represents the very essence of Eastern civilization. China is committed to the path of peaceful development. The logic that a strong country is bound to seek hegemony no longer applies and the willful use of force will lead to nowhere. China is the biggest contributor of peacekeepers among the permanent members of the UN Security Council. The proud sons of the Chinese people are among the UN peacekeepers that gave their lives to the mission of peace in Mali and South Sudan not long ago. China will continue to fulfill its international obligations and serve as the builder and defender of world peace.
第二，共同构建合作共赢的全球伙伴关系。在经济全球化的今天，没有与世隔绝的孤岛。同为地球村居民，我们要树立人类命运共同体意识。伙伴精神是二十国集团最宝贵的财富，也是各国共同应对全球性挑战的选择。	
Second, we can work together to build a global partnership for win-win cooperation. In the era of economic globalization, there is no island completely cut off from the rest of the world. As members of the global village, we need to cultivate the awareness of a community of shared future for mankind. Partnership is the most valuable asset of the G20 and the choice of all countries as they rise up together to global challenges.
我们应该求同存异、聚同化异，共同构建合作共赢的新型国际关系。国家不论大小、强弱、贫富，都应该平等相待，既把自己发展好，也帮助其他国家发展好。大家都好，世界才能更美好。	
We need to seek common ground while shelving and narrowing differences in an effort to build a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation. All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, must treat each other as equals. We need to help each other achieve sound development as we work to ensure our own development. The world will be a better place only when everyone is better off.
我们应该加强在重大全球性问题上的沟通和协调，为实现世界和平、稳定、繁荣提供更多公共产品。我们应该建立健全宏观经济政策协调机制，考虑国内政策的联动效应和传导影响，推动正面而非负面溢出效应。我们应该以伙伴关系为依托，秉持共赢理念，加强各领域务实合作，不断扩大合作内涵和外延，推动取得符合人民期待的合作成果。我们应该促进不同国家、不同文化和历史背景的人们深入交流，增进彼此理解，携手构建人类命运共同体。	
We need to step up communication and coordination on major global issues and provide more public goods for the fostering of a peaceful, stable and prosperous world. We need to institute and steadily improve macroeconomic policy coordination mechanisms, be mindful of the related and chain effects of our domestic policies and ensure their positive rather than negative spillovers. We need to rely on partnerships, uphold the vision of win-win results, step up practical cooperation across the board, continue to enrich and expand cooperation and ensure that such cooperation delivers outcomes to meet people's expectations. We need to enable people of different countries, cultures and historical backgrounds to deepen exchanges, enhance mutual understanding and jointly build a community of shared future for mankind.
第三，共同完善全球经济治理。常言说，小智治事，大智治制。面对世界经济形势的发展演变，全球经济治理需要与时俱进、因时而变。全球经济治理应该以平等为基础，更好反映世界经济格局新现实，增加新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权，确保各国在国际经济合作中权利平等、机会平等、规则平等。	
Third, we can work together to improve global economic governance. As a Chinese saying goes, people with petty shrewdness attend to trivial matters while those with greater wisdom attend to governance of institutions. As the world economic situation changes, it is necessary that global economic governance remains relevant and adaptive to the changing times. Global economic governance should be based on equality, better reflect the new realities of the world economic landscape, increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries and ensure that all countries have equal rights, equal opportunities and equal rules to follow in international economic cooperation.
全球经济治理应该以开放为导向，坚持理念、政策、机制开放，适应形势变化，广纳良言，充分听取社会各界建议和诉求，鼓励各方积极参与和融入，不搞排他性安排，防止治理机制封闭化和规则碎片化。全球经济治理应该以合作为动力，全球性挑战需要全球性应对，合作是必然选择，各国要加强沟通和协调，照顾彼此利益关切，共商规则，共建机制，共迎挑战。全球经济治理应该以共享为目标，提倡所有人参与，所有人受益，不搞一家独大或者赢者通吃，而是寻求利益共享，实现共赢目标。	
Global economic governance should embrace openness. It should be based on open concepts, open policies and open mechanisms so as to adapt to the changing situation. It should be open to constructive suggestions and the recommendations and aspirations of different quarters of society. It should encourage active participation and integration of various parties, reject exclusive arrangements and avoid closed governance mechanisms and fragmentation of rules. Global economic governance should be driven by cooperation, as global challenges require global responses, and cooperation is the necessary choice. Countries need to step up communication and coordination, accommodate each other's interests and concerns, and work together to discuss the rules, build mechanisms and meet challenges. Global economic governance should be a mechanism of sharing. It should be about participation by all and benefits for all. Instead of seeking dominance or winner-takes-all results, it should encourage the sharing of interests and win-win prospects.
当前形势下，全球经济治理特别要抓住以下重点：共同构建公正高效的全球金融治理格局，维护世界经济稳定大局；共同构建开放透明的全球贸易和投资治理格局，巩固多边贸易体制，释放全球经贸投资合作潜力；共同构建绿色低碳的全球能源治理格局，推动全球绿色发展合作；共同构建包容联动的全球发展治理格局，以落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程为目标，共同增进全人类福祉！	
At this stage, global economic governance should focus on the following: jointly ensure equitable and efficient global financial governance and uphold the overall stability of the world economy; jointly foster open and transparent global trade and investment governance to cement the multilateral trading regime and unleash the potential of global cooperation in economy, trade and investment; jointly establish green and low-carbon global energy governance to promote global green development cooperation; and jointly facilitate an inclusive and interconnected global development governance to implement the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and jointly advance the well-being of mankind.
二十国集团领导人峰会已经举行10届，正处在关键发展节点上。中方主办杭州峰会的目标之一，是推动二十国集团实现从短期政策向中长期政策转型，从危机应对向长效治理机制转型，巩固其作为全球经济治理重要平台的地位。	
Since the G20 has convened ten summits, it has come to a crucial juncture of development. One of the goals of China's G20 Presidency is to enable the G20 to transform from a crisis response mechanism focusing on short-term policies to one of long-term governance that shapes medium- to long-term policies, and solidify its role as the premier forum for international economic governance.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
工商界是促进增长的生力军。中方把工商峰会安排在领导人峰会前夕举行，就是要充分汇集工商界的思想和智慧。我高兴地看到，二十国集团工商界人士积极参与全年会议进程，同其他各界人士一道，针对二十国集团关注重点，围绕金融促增长、贸易和投资、基础设施建设、中小企业发展、就业、反腐败等议题提出意见和建议，为二十国集团政策制定提供了重要参考，为杭州峰会作出了积极贡献。
The business community is the main driver of growth. By convening the B20 Summit on the eve of the G20 Summit, China wishes to fully pool the ideas and wisdom of the business community. I am pleased to see that the business people from G20 countries have taken an active part in the G20 process throughout the year. Together with people of other communities, you have presented your views and suggestions on financing growth, trade and investment, infrastructure, SME development, employment, anti-corruption and other subjects of G20 priorities. You have provided important recommendations for G20 policy making and contributed positively to the Hangzhou Summit.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
这几天，正值钱塘江大潮，“弄潮儿向涛头立。手把红旗旗不湿。”我同各位一样，期待着二十国集团勇做世界经济的弄潮儿。相信在各方一道努力下，杭州峰会一定能够取得成功！
The tidal bore is sweeping up the Qiantang River these few days. As an ancient Chinese poem reads, "The tide riders surf the currents; the flags they hold up never get wet". I, like all of you, look forward to a G20 that will ride the tides in the world economy. I believe that, with various parties working together, the Hangzhou Summit will certainly achieve success.
最后，我祝这次工商峰会取得圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish the B20 Summit a full success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
90. 习近平在阿拉伯国家联盟总部的演讲
共同开创中阿关系的美好未来
——在阿拉伯国家联盟总部的演讲
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
（2016年1月21日，开罗）
Work Together for a Bright Future of China-Arab Relations
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Arab League Headquarters
Cairo, 21 January 2016
尊敬的阿拉比秘书长，
尊敬的伊斯梅尔总理，
尊敬的各位部长，
各位阿拉伯国家使节，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency Nabil el-Araby, Secretary-General of the Arab League,
Your Excellency Sherif Ismail, Prime Minister of Egypt,
Distinguished Ministers,
Your Excellencies Diplomatic Envoys of Arab States,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
很高兴同阿拉伯朋友见面。这是我担任中国国家主席后首次出访阿拉伯国家。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，向阿拉伯国家和人民，致以崇高的敬意和良好的祝愿！	
It gives me great pleasure to meet with Arab friends. This is my first visit to the Arab world as Chinese President. First of all, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I wish to pay high tribute and extend best wishes to the Arab states and people.
“未之见而亲焉，可以往矣；久而不忘焉，可以来矣。”来到阿拉伯国家，我和我的同事们都有一种亲近感。这是因为，在穿越时空的往来中，中阿两个民族彼此真诚相待，在古丝绸之路上出入相友，在争取民族独立的斗争中甘苦与共，在建设国家的征程上守望相助。这份信任牢不可破，是金钱买不到的。	
An ancient Chinese philosopher said, "Visit those who you feel close to even without meeting them before, and invite those you cannot forget long after your paths crossed." Coming to the Arab world, my colleagues and I all feel a sense of affinity. This is because in their exchanges across time and space, the Chinese and Arab peoples have been sincere with each other, forging friendship along the ancient Silk Road, sharing weal and woe in the fight for national independence, and helping each other in building their own countries. Such trust is unbreakable and cannot be bought with money.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中东是一块富饶的土地。让我们感到痛心的是，这里迄今仍未摆脱战争和冲突。中东向何处去？这是世界屡屡提及的“中东之问”。少一些冲突和苦难，多一点安宁和尊严，这是中东人民的向往。	
The Middle East is a land of abundance. Yet we are pained to see it still plagued by war and conflict. Where should the Middle East be headed? This is the question the international community keeps asking. The people here want less conflict and suffering, more peace and dignity.
有一位阿拉伯诗人曾说：“当你面向太阳的时候，你定会看到自己的希望。”中东蕴含希望，各方要在追求对话和发展的道路上寻找希望。	
An Arab poet once wrote, when you turn to the sun, you will see hope. There is hope in the Middle East, and all parties should look for it by pursuing dialogue and development.
——化解分歧，关键要加强对话。武力不是解决问题之道，零和思维无法带来持久安全。对话过程虽然漫长，甚至可能出现反复，但后遗症最小，结果也最可持续。冲突各方应该开启对话，把最大公约数找出来，在推进政治解决上形成聚焦。国际社会应该尊重当事方、周边国家、地区组织意愿和作用，而非从外部强加解决方案，要为对话保持最大耐心，留出最大空间。	
-- The key to addressing differences is to enhance dialogue. Use of force offers no solution to problems, neither will zero-sum mentality bring enduring peace. The process of dialogue could be protracted, and may even suffer setbacks, but it entails minimal adverse after-effects and produces the most sustainable outcome. Parties to the conflict should begin dialogue, identify their biggest common interests, and focus on advancing the process of political settlement. The international community should respect the will and role of those directly involved, the neighboring countries and regional organizations, instead of imposing a solution from outside. For dialogue to succeed, there is need for utmost patience and flexibility.
——破解难题，关键要加快发展。中东动荡，根源出在发展，出路最终也要靠发展。发展事关人民生活和尊严。这是一场同时间的赛跑，是希望和失望的较量。只有让青年人在发展中获得生活的尊严，在他们的心中，希望才能跑赢失望，才会自觉拒绝暴力，远离极端思潮和恐怖主义。	
-- The key to overcoming difficulties is to accelerate development. Turmoil in the Middle East stems from the lack of development, and the ultimate solution will depend on development, which bears on everyone’s well-being and dignity. It is a race against time and a struggle between hope and disillusion. Only when young people are able to live a fulfilled life with dignity through development can hope prevail in their heart. Only then will they voluntarily reject violence, extremist ideologies and terrorism.
——道路选择，关键要符合国情。现代化不是单选题。历史条件的多样性，决定了各国选择发展道路的多样性。阿拉伯谚语讲：“自己的指甲才知道哪里痒”。在发展道路的探索上，照搬没有出路，模仿容易迷失，实践才出真知。一个国家的发展道路，只能由这个国家的人民，依据自己的历史传承、文化传统、经济社会发展水平来决定。	
-- The key to choosing a right path is to make sure that it suits the national conditions. There is more than just one path leading to modernization. Given the varied historical conditions, it is only natural that different countries may choose different paths of development. As an Arab proverb reminds us, "Nothing can scratch your skin quite like your own nails." When exploring development paths, one will get nowhere by blindly copying others. Only by proceeding from one’s own realities can the right path be found. The development path of a country can only be determined by its people in light of its history, cultural traditions, and level of economic and social development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
阿盟是阿拉伯国家团结的象征。维护巴勒斯坦人民合法民族权益是阿盟的神圣使命，也是国际社会的共同责任。巴勒斯坦问题不应被边缘化，更不应被世界遗忘。巴勒斯坦问题是中东和平的根源性问题。国际社会定分止争，既要推动复谈、落实和约，也要主持公道、伸张正义，二者缺一不可。没有公道，和约只能带来冰冷的和平。国际社会应该坚持以公道为念、以正义为基，尽快纠正历史不公。	
The Arab League is the symbol of unity among Arab states. To uphold the lawful national rights and interests of the Palestinian people is the lofty mission of the Arab League and the shared responsibility of the international community. The Palestinian issue should not be marginalized, still less should it fall into oblivion. It is an issue of fundamental importance to peace in the Middle East. To bring an end to the conflict, the international community should not only promote the resumption of talks and implementation of peace agreements, but also uphold fairness and justice. One cannot do without the other. Without fairness and justice, peace accord can only bring about a cold peace. The international community should stick to the principle of fairness and justice, and address historical injustice as soon as possible.
我愿在此呼吁，国际社会采取更强有力行动，在政治上激活和谈进程，在经济上推进重建进程，让巴勒斯坦人民早日看到希望。中国坚定支持中东和平进程，支持建立以1967年边界为基础、以东耶路撒冷为首都、享有完全主权的巴勒斯坦国。我们理解巴勒斯坦以国家身份融入国际社会的正当诉求，支持建立新的中东问题促和机制，支持阿盟、伊斯兰合作组织为此作出的努力。为改善巴勒斯坦民生，中国决定向巴方提供5000万元人民币无偿援助，并将为巴勒斯坦太阳能电站建设项目提供支持。	
In this context, I wish to call on the international community to take more effective measures, resume peace talks at the political level and advance reconstruction on the economic front so as to bring hope to the Palestinian people at an early date. China firmly supports the Middle East peace process and supports the establishment of a State of Palestine enjoying full sovereignty on the basis of the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital. We understand the legitimate aspirations of Palestine to integrate into the international community as a state. We are in favor of putting in place a new mechanism to promote peace on the Middle East question and support efforts made by the Arab League and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation toward this end. To improve Palestinian people’s well-being, the Chinese government will provide 50 million RMB yuan of grant to the Palestinian side and support the solar power station project in Palestine.
叙利亚现状不可持续，冲突不会有赢家，受苦的是地区人民。解决热点问题，停火是当务之急，政治对话是根本之道，人道主义救援刻不容缓。中方今年将再向叙利亚、约旦、黎巴嫩、利比亚、也门人民提供2.3亿元人民币人道主义援助。	
The current state of affairs in Syria is unsustainable. There will be no winner out of a conflict, and it is the people in the region who suffer. To address the hot-spots, what is most urgent now is to bring about ceasefire. Political dialogue is the path to a fundamental solution. At the same time, humanitarian assistance brooks no delay. This year, the Chinese side will provide 230 million RMB yuan of additional humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya and Yemen.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
2014年6月，我在中阿合作论坛北京部长级会议上提出，中阿共建“一带一路”，构建以能源合作为主轴，以基础设施建设、贸易和投资便利化为两翼，以核能、航天卫星、新能源三大高新领域为突破口的“1+2+3”合作格局，阿拉伯朋友热烈响应。现在，我们已经有了早期收获。	
At the Ministerial Conference of China-Arab States Cooperation Forum in Beijing in June 2014, I called for joint Chinese and Arab efforts to build the Belt and Road Initiative. I suggested that we take energy cooperation as one priority, infrastructure development and trade and investment facilitation as two key areas, and nuclear energy, aviation satellite and new energy as the three high-tech areas for breakthrough. This so-called "1+2+3" cooperation pattern was warmly received by our Arab friends, and now we have seen early harvest.
——顶层设计日臻成熟。中阿建立了政治战略对话机制，中国同8个阿拉伯国家建立了战略伙伴关系，同6个阿拉伯国家签署了共建“一带一路”协议，7个阿拉伯国家成为亚洲基础设施投资银行创始成员。	
-- Top-level designing is getting more mature. China and Arab states have set up the mechanism of Strategic and Political Dialogue. China has entered into strategic partnership with eight Arab states and signed agreements with six Arab states on jointly developing the Belt and Road Initiative. Seven Arab states have become founding members of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
——务实合作显露活力。中国是阿拉伯国家第二大贸易伙伴，新签对阿拉伯国家工程承包合同额464亿美元；海湾阿拉伯国家合作委员会重启对华自由贸易区谈判并取得实质性进展，阿拉伯国家建立了两家人民币清算中心，中阿双方成立两个共同投资基金；中阿技术转移中心正式揭牌成立，双方就建立和平利用核能培训中心、清洁能源培训中心、北斗卫星导航系统落地等达成一致；第二届中阿博览会签署合作项目金额1830亿元人民币，成为中阿共建“一带一路”的重要平台。	
-- Pragmatic cooperation is thriving. Being the second largest trading partner of Arab states, China has signed US$46.4 billion of new project contracts with them. FTA negotiations have resumed between the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) and China and witnessed substantial progress. There are two RMB clearing centers in Arab states and two joint investment funds between China and Arab states. The China-Arab States Technology Transfer Center has been officially inaugurated. The two sides have agreed to set up training centers for peaceful use of nuclear energy and clean energy respectively, and to introduce the BeiDou Navigation Satellite System to Arab states. The second China-Arab States Expo has seen the signing of cooperation projects worth 183 billion RMB yuan, serving as an important platform for our joint efforts to build the Belt and Road.
——人文交流丰富多彩。我们举办了中阿友好年活动，签署了第一个共建联合大学协议，启动了百家文化机构对口合作，在华阿拉伯留学生突破14000人，在阿拉伯国家孔子学院增至11所，中阿每周往来航班增至183架次。	
-- People-to-people and cultural exchanges have become more diversified. We have carried out a variety of activities during the Year of China-Arab Friendship, signed agreement on the first joint university and started cooperation between 100 cultural institutions from both sides. The number of Arab students in China has exceeded 14,000. There are now 11 Confucius Institutes in Arab states. Every week, there are 183 flights between China and Arab states.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国坚持走和平发展道路，奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，实行互利共赢的对外开放战略，着力点之一就是积极主动参与全球治理，构建互利合作格局，承担国际责任义务，扩大同各国利益汇合，打造人类命运共同体。	
China follows the path of peaceful development, an independent foreign policy of peace and a win-win strategy of opening-up. One of our priorities is to take an active part in global governance, pursue mutually beneficial cooperation, assume international responsibilities and obligations, expand convergence of interests with other countries and forge a community of shared future for mankind.
我们要抓住未来5年的关键时期共建“一带一路”，确立和平、创新、引领、治理、交融的行动理念，做中东和平的建设者、中东发展的推动者、中东工业化的助推者、中东稳定的支持者、中东民心交融的合作伙伴。	
We need to make good use of the coming five years as the crucial period to jointly build the Belt and Road and set out the guiding principles of peace, innovation, guidance, governance and integration. We should be builders of peace, promoters of development, boosters of industrialization, supporters of stability and partners of people-to-people exchanges in the Middle East.
中方愿同阿拉伯国家开展共建“一带一路”行动，推动中阿两大民族复兴形成更多交汇。
China is ready to work with Arab states to jointly build the Belt and Road and expand common ground in our respective effort to achieve national renewal.
第一，高举和平对话旗帜，开展促进稳定行动。“一带一路”建设，倡导不同民族、不同文化要“交而通”，而不是“交而恶”，彼此要多拆墙、少筑墙，把对话当作“黄金法则”用起来，大家一起做有来有往的邻居。	
First, we need to hold high the banner of peace and dialogue and take steps to promote stability. The Belt and Road Initiative calls for exchanges between nations and civilizations for mutual understanding, rather than mutual resentment. It is important to remove, rather than erect, walls between each other, take dialogue as the golden rule and be good neighbors with each other.
中国古代圣贤孟子说：“立天下之正位，行天下之大道。”中国对中东的政策举措坚持从事情本身的是非曲直出发，坚持从中东人民根本利益出发。我们在中东不找代理人，而是劝和促谈；不搞势力范围，而是推动大家一起加入“一带一路”朋友圈；不谋求填补“真空”，而是编织互利共赢的合作伙伴网络。	
The ancient Chinese philosopher Mencius said, "Ensuring the right conduct and uphold justice should be the way to follow across the land." With regard to China’s policy measures toward the Middle East, China decides its position on issues on the basis of their own merits and the fundamental interests of the people in the Middle East. Instead of looking for a proxy in the Middle East, we promote peace talks; instead of seeking any sphere of influence, we call on all parties to join the circle of friends for the Belt and Road Initiative; instead of attempting to fill the "vacuum", we build a cooperative partnership network for win-win outcomes.
中国人有穷变通久的哲学，阿拉伯人也说“没有不变的常态”。我们尊重阿拉伯国家的变革诉求，支持阿拉伯国家自主探索发展道路。处理好改革发展稳定关系十分重要。这就好比阿拉伯喜闻乐见的赛骆驼，前半程跑得太快，后半程就可能体力透支；前半程跑得太慢，后半程又可能跟不上。骑手只有平衡好速度和耐力，才能够坚持到最后。	
The Chinese people believe in the philosophy of change and adaptation. The Arabs also say "continuing in the same state is impossible". We respect the Arab states’ aspiration for reform, and support Arab states in their efforts to independently explore the path of development. To properly handle the relations between reform, development and stability is of vital importance. This is like camel racing, a popular sport in the Arab world. If the camel runs too fast at the beginning, it may be exhausted toward the end of the race. Yet if it starts too slow, it may lag behind in the end. Only the rider who keeps a good balance between speed and stamina can claim the final victory.
恐怖主义和极端思潮泛滥，是对和平与发展的严峻考验。打击恐怖主义和极端势力，需要凝聚共识。恐怖主义不分国界，也没有好坏之分，反恐不能搞双重标准。同样，也不能把恐怖主义同特定民族宗教挂钩，那样只会制造民族宗教隔阂。没有哪一项政策能够单独完全奏效，反恐必须坚持综合施策、标本兼治。	
The spread of terrorist and extremist ideas poses a serious challenge to peace and development. Countries need to have consensus about the fight against terrorist and extremist forces. Terrorism knows no borders. There is no distinction between good and bad terrorism. And there should be no double standards in fighting terrorism. For the same reason, terrorism shall not be linked with any specific ethnic group or religion, as it will only create ethnic and religious tensions. No policy can be effective on its own, and a comprehensive strategy that addresses both symptoms and root causes must be applied in the fight against terrorism.
为此，中方将建立中阿改革发展研究中心；在中阿合作论坛框架内召开文明对话与去极端化圆桌会议，组织100名宗教界知名人士互访；加强中阿网络安全合作，切断暴力恐怖音视频网络传播渠道，共同参与制定网络空间国际反恐公约；提供3亿美元援助用于执法合作、警察培训等项目，帮助地区国家加强维护稳定能力建设。	
To this end, China will set up a China-Arab research center on reform and development. We will hold a roundtable on inter-civilization dialogue and eradicating extremism within the framework of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum and organize exchange of visits by 100 renowned religious leaders. We will enhance cooperation on cyber security, block the online transmission of audio and video materials instigating violence and terrorism, and jointly participate in the formulation of an international counter-terrorism convention in the cyberspace. We will provide US$300 million of assistance to support such projects as law enforcement cooperation and police training to help regional countries enhance their capacity in maintaining law and order.
第二，推进结构调整，开展创新合作行动。日趋激烈的国际发展竞争，需要我们提高合作档次。要推进“油气+”合作新模式，挖掘合作新潜力。中方愿同阿方加强上中下游全产业链合作，续签长期购油协议，构建互惠互利、安全可靠、长期友好的中阿能源战略合作关系。要创新贸易和投资机制，拓展合作新空间。	
Second, we need to advance structural adjustment and adopt new ways of cooperation. Given the ever more fierce global competition in development, we need to upgrade our cooperation. We need to advance the "oil and gas plus" cooperation model and further tap the potential of cooperation. China is ready to strengthen cooperation with Arab states across the entire industrial chain from upstream to midstream to downstream, renew long-term oil purchase agreement, and enter into strategic energy cooperation with Arab states that features mutual benefit, reliability and enduring friendship. It is important to set up new mechanism for trade and investment and expand space for cooperation.
中国对外投资已经进入快车道，阿拉伯国家主权基金实力雄厚，我们可以更多签署本币互换、相互投资协议，扩大人民币结算业务规模，加快投资便利化进程，引导双方投资基金和社会资金参与“一带一路”重点项目。双方要加强高新领域合作、培育合作新动力，可以依托已经成立的技术转移、培训中心等，加快高铁、核能、航天、新能源、基因工程等高新技术落地进程，提高中阿务实合作含金量。
As China is already on the fast track of outbound investment and Arab states boast strong sovereign wealth funds, we may sign more currency swap and mutual investment agreements, expand RMB settlement business, accelerate investment facilitation and steer the investment fund and private capital of our two sides toward major projects under the Belt and Road Initiative. It is important to step up high-tech cooperation and foster new driving force for our cooperation. On the basis of the existing technology transfer and training centers, the two sides may speed up the introduction of new and high technologies such as high-speed rail, nuclear power, aerospace, new energy and genetic engineering so as to add more value to the pragmatic cooperation between China and Arab states.
为此，中方将实施创新合作行动，愿同阿方探索“石油、贷款、工程”一揽子合作模式，延伸传统油气合作链条，合作开发新能源、可再生能源；中方将参与中东工业园区建设，重点推进苏伊士经贸合作区建设，通过人员培训、共同规划、合作建厂等方式，实现加工制造、运输出口一体化；启动中阿科技伙伴计划，在现代农业、信息通信、人口健康等领域共建10个联合实验室；举办中阿北斗合作论坛。	
For this purpose, China will implement the action plan for new ways of cooperation, explore a model of package cooperation involving oil, loan and project, and extend the traditional oil and gas cooperation chain to the development of new and renewable energy. China will take part in the development of industrial parks in the Middle East with priority given to the Suez Economic and Trade Cooperation Zone. By means of personnel training and joint planning and building of factories, we will integrate the whole process from processing and manufacturing to transportation and export. We will launch China-Arab states scientific and technological partnership program and jointly build 10 laboratories on modern agriculture, ICT and health. We will hold China-Arab States BeiDou Cooperation Forum.
第三，促进中东工业化，开展产能对接行动。产能合作契合中东国家经济多元化大趋势，可以引领中东国家走出一条经济、民本、绿色的工业化新路。	
Third, we need to advance industrialization in the Middle East and carry out production capacity cooperation. Production capacity cooperation is consistent with the overall trend of economic diversification in the Middle East. It can help Middle East countries embark on a new path of efficient, people-oriented and green industrialization.
中国装备性价比高，加上技术转让、人才培训、强有力融资支持，可以帮助中东国家花较少的钱建立起钢铁、有色金属、建材、玻璃、汽车制造、电厂等急需产业，填补产业空白，培育新的比较优势。中方优势产能和中东人力资源相结合，可以创造更多更好的就业机会。	
Chinese equipment is of high quality yet inexpensive price. Combined with technology transfer, personnel training and strong financing support, they can help countries in the Middle East develop urgently needed industries such as iron and steel, non-ferrous metals, construction materials, glass, car manufacturing and power plant with relative low cost to fill the gap in their industrial structure and foster new comparative advantages. China’s competitive production capacity and the human resources in the Middle East, when combined, will deliver more and better job opportunities for the region.
今天上午，我出席了中埃苏伊士经贸合作区二期揭牌仪式，这一项目将引进纺织服装、石油装备、摩托、太阳能等100多家企业，可以为埃及创造1万多个就业机会。	
This morning, I attended the inauguration ceremony of the second phase of the China-Egypt Suez Economic and Trade Cooperation Zone. The project will bring to Egypt over 100 companies in such sectors as textile, garment, oil equipment, motorcycle and solar energy, and create over 10,000 job opportunities for Egypt.
为促进中东工业化进程，中国将联合阿拉伯国家，共同实施产能对接行动，包括设立150亿美元的中东工业化专项贷款，用于同地区国家开展的产能合作、基础设施建设项目，同时向中东国家提供100亿美元商业性贷款，支持开展产能合作；提供100亿美元优惠性质贷款，并提高优惠贷款优惠度；同阿联酋、卡塔尔设立共计200亿美元共同投资基金，主要投资中东传统能源、基础设施建设、高端制造业等。	
In order to promote the industrialization process of the Middle East, China will work with Arab states to launch an action plan for production capacity cooperation. Under this initiative, China will set up a US$15 billion special loan for industrialization in the Middle East to be used on production capacity cooperation and infrastructure projects in regional countries, and provide countries in the Middle East with US$10 billion of commercial loans to support production capacity cooperation. China will also provide US$10 billion of concessional loans with even more favorable terms for regional countries. Meanwhile, China will launch a US$20 billion joint investment fund with the UAE and Qatar to primarily invest in traditional energy, infrastructure development and high-end manufacturing industries in the Middle East.
第四，倡导文明交流互鉴，开展增进友好行动。文明具有多样性，就如同自然界物种的多样性一样，一同构成我们这个星球的生命本源。中东是人类古老文明的交汇之地，有着色彩斑斓的文明和文化多样性。中国将继续毫不动摇支持中东、阿拉伯国家维护民族文化传统，反对一切针对特定民族宗教的歧视和偏见。	
Fourth, we need to strengthen cultural exchanges and mutual learning and take actions to enhance friendship. Like the diverse species in Mother Nature, cultural diversity gives life to our planet. The Middle East is the meeting place of ancient human civilizations and home to diverse and splendid civilizations and cultures. China will continue to unswervingly support Middle East and Arab states in preserving their ethnic and cultural traditions, and oppose all forms of discrimination and prejudice against specific ethnic group and religion.
中华文明与阿拉伯文明各成体系、各具特色，但都包含有人类发展进步所积淀的共同理念和共同追求，都重视中道平和、忠恕宽容、自我约束等价值观念。我们应该开展文明对话，倡导包容互鉴，一起挖掘民族文化传统中积极处世之道同当今时代的共鸣点。	
The Chinese and Arab civilizations each have their own systems and distinctive features, yet they both embody the common ideals and aspirations of mankind for development and progress, and they both champion such values as moderation, peace, forgiveness, tolerance and self-restraint. We should promote dialogue among civilizations in a spirit of inclusiveness and mutual learning and explore together values in our respective cultural tradition that remain relevant today as positive guidance for good relations.
“一带一路”延伸之处，是人文交流聚集活跃之地。民心交融要绵绵用力，久久为功。昨天，我会见了获得“中阿友好杰出贡献奖”的10位阿拉伯老朋友。正是有一代接一代的友好人士辛勤耕耘，中阿友好的大树才能枝繁叶茂、四季常青。	
The regions covered by the Belt and Road Initiative are vibrant in people-to-people exchanges. The close ties between our peoples must be nurtured through constant efforts. Yesterday, I met with ten old Arab friends who received the Award for Outstanding Contribution to China-Arab Friendship. It is the hard work of generations of friendly people from both sides that has enabled the seedlings of China-Arab friendship to grow into luxuriant and evergreen trees.
为了让人才和思想在“一带一路”上流动起来，我们将实施增进友好“百千万”工程，包括落实“丝路书香”设想，开展100部中阿典籍互译；加强智库对接，邀请100名专家学者互访；提供1000个阿拉伯青年领袖培训名额，邀请1500名阿拉伯政党领导人来华考察，培育中阿友好的青年使者和政治领军人物；提供1万个奖学金名额和1万个培训名额，落实1万名中阿艺术家互访。	
In order to ensure the smooth flow of talents and ideas along the Belt and Road, we will implement the "hundred, thousand and ten thousand" project for enhancing China-Arab friendship. Under the project, we will launch a "Silk Road Book Translation" program for the translation of 100 Chinese and Arab classics into each other’s language. We will strengthen connectivity between our think tanks and invite 100 experts and scholars to visit each other’s countries. We will provide 1,000 training opportunities for young Arab leaders and invite 1,500 leaders of Arab political parties to visit China to bring up young envoys and political leaders for China-Arab friendship. We will also provide 10,000 scholarships and 10,000 training opportunities for Arab states and organize mutual visits for 10,000 Chinese and Arab artists.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
埃及谚语说：“比时间永恒的是金字塔。”在我看来，最永恒的是埃及人民崇尚变革、追求自由的伟大精神。今天的埃及承载着传承文明的希望，肩负着探索复兴道路的使命。中国坚定支持埃及政府和人民的努力，期待埃及成为地区稳定支柱和发展标杆。	
As an Egyptian proverb goes, "Man fears time. Time fears the pyramid." To me, nothing is more enduring that the great spirit of reform and freedom that defines the Egyptian people. Today’s Egypt represents the hope of a renewed civilization and carries the mission of national rejuvenation. China firmly supports the efforts of the Egyptian government and people and looks to Egypt to become a pillar of stability and model of development in the region.
民族复兴的追梦路上，难免会经历曲折和痛苦，但只要路走对了，就不怕遥远。中国和阿拉伯国家要心手相连、并肩攀登，为深化中阿友好合作而努力！为人类和平与发展的崇高事业而共同奋斗！	
In the pursuit of national rejuvenation, setbacks and pains are hardly avoidable. Yet if the path is correct, one will eventually reach his destination. China and Arab states must forge ahead hand in hand to scale new heights, deepen friendship and cooperation, and make a joint endeavor for the lofty cause of peace and development for mankind.
舒克拉！谢谢！	
Shukran. Thank you.
61. 习近平主席在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的主旨演讲
抓住世界经济转型机遇 谋求亚太更大发展
——在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的主旨演讲
（2017年11月10日，岘港）
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
Seizing the Opportunity of a Global Economy in Transition
And Accelerating Development of the Asia-Pacific
Keynote Address by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the APEC CEO Summit
Da Nang, 10 November 2017
武进禄主席先生，
亚太工商界各位代表，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Chairman Vu Tien Loc,
Leaders of the APEC Business Community,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
大家好！很高兴来到岘港，再次同亚太工商界的朋友见面。	
Good afternoon! I am glad to come to Da Nang and meet all of you again.
亚太是全球经济最大的板块，也是世界经济增长的一个主要引擎。工商界是促进经济增长的生力军，是新发展理念的探索者、实践者。这几年，每次出席亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议，我都抽出时间同工商界的朋友见面，共同探讨应对当前挑战的思路和举措。
Our region, the Asia-Pacific, has the biggest share of the global economy; and it is a major engine driving global growth. The business community is a primary contributor to growth, as it keeps exploring new ways of development. That's why during the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting over the last several years, I have always taken time to meet business leaders and discuss with you approaches and measures to address the challenges we face.
国际金融危机发生10年来，国际社会一起努力，推动世界经济逐步回到复苏的轨道。今天，我们迎来了世界经济逐步向好的局面。尽管仍然面临风险和不确定性，但全球贸易和投资回暖，金融市场预期向好，各方信心显著增强。	
It has been 10 years since the international financial crisis broke out. Over the last decade, the international community have worked in concert to steer the global economy back to the track of recovery. Thanks to our efforts, the global economy is improving. Despite risks and uncertainties, global trade and investment are picking up, people are more optimistic about the outlook of financial markets, and confidence is growing in all sectors.
发展之路没有终点，只有新的起点。“往者不可谏，来者犹可追。”世界正处在快速变化的历史进程之中，世界经济正在发生更深层次的变化。我们要洞察世界经济发展趋势，找准方位，把握规律，果敢应对。	
Development is a journey with no end, but with one new departure point after another. An ancient Chinese philosopher once observed, "We should focus our mind on the future, not the past." We live in a fast changing world, and the global economy is undergoing more profound changes. We must therefore closely follow the trend of the global economy, identify its underlying dynamics, keep to the right direction, and, on that basis, take bold action.
——我们正面临增长动能的深刻转变。当前，改革创新成为各国化解挑战、谋求发展的方向。结构性改革的正面效应和潜能持续释放，对各国经济增长的促进作用进一步显现。新一轮科技和产业革命形成势头，数字经济、共享经济加速发展，新产业、新模式、新业态层出不穷，新的增长动能不断积聚。	
-- We are seeing a profound change in growth drivers. Countries are turning to reform and innovation to meet challenges and achieve growth. The potential of structural reforms is being unlocked and its positive impact of boosting growth of various countries has become more evident. A new round of technological and industrial revolutions is gaining momentum. Digital economy and sharing economy have registered rapid growth. New industries as well as new forms and models of business are flourishing. As a result, new growth drivers are being created.
——我们正面临全球发展方式的深刻转变。随着时代进步，发展的内涵正在发生深刻变化。创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念日益深入人心，实现更加全面、更有质量、更可持续的发展，是国际社会共同追求的目标。落实2030年可持续发展议程，应对气候变化等全球性挑战，成为国际社会重要共识。	
-- We are seeing a profound change in the model of global growth. As time advances, development has taken on profoundly richer implications. The vision of innovative, coordinated, green and open development for all is gaining increasing public support. To achieve more comprehensive, higher quality and more sustainable development has become the shared goal of the international community. To implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and adapt to climate change and other challenges of a global nature has become an important international consensus.
——我们正面临经济全球化进程的深刻转变。过去数十年，经济全球化对世界经济发展作出了重要贡献，已成为不可逆转的时代潮流。同时，面对形势的发展变化，经济全球化在形式和内容上面临新的调整，理念上应该更加注重开放包容，方向上应该更加注重普惠平衡，效应上应该更加注重公正共赢。
-- We are seeing a profound change in economic globalization. Over the last few decades, economic globalization has contributed greatly to global growth. Indeed, it has become an irreversible historical trend. Against the backdrop of evolving global developments, economic globalization faces new adjustments in both form and substance. In pursuing economic globalization, we should make it more open and inclusive, more balanced, more equitable and beneficial to all.
——我们正面临全球经济治理体系的深刻转变。世界经济格局的演变对全球经济治理体系提出了更高要求。坚持多边主义，谋求共商共建共享，建立紧密伙伴关系，构建人类命运共同体，是新形势下全球经济治理的必然趋势。
-- We are seeing a profound change in the system of global economic governance. The evolving global economic environment demands more from the system of global economic governance. We should uphold multilateralism, pursue shared growth through consultation and collaboration, forge closer partnerships, and build a community with a shared future for mankind. This, I believe, is what we should do in conducting global economic governance in a new era.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
面对世界经济的深刻转变，亚太在改革创新大潮中是勇立潮头，还是迟疑徘徊？是主动引导经济全球化继续前行，还是在挑战面前犹豫不定？是携手开辟区域合作新局面，还是各自渐行渐远？
Faced with the profound changes in the global economy, should we, the Asia-Pacific economies, lead reform and innovation, or just hesitate and proceed haltingly? Should we steer economic globalization, or dither and stall in the face of challenge? Should we jointly advance regional cooperation, or go our separate ways?
答案是清楚的，我们必须顺应大势，勇于担当，共同开辟亚太发展繁荣的光明未来。	
This is my answer: We must advance with the trend of times, live up to our responsibility and work together to deliver a bright future of development and prosperity for the Asia-Pacific.
第一，继续坚持建设开放型经济，努力实现互利共赢。开放带来进步，封闭必然落后。亚太经济体通过自身发展实践，对这一点有着深刻体会。我们要努力打造平等协商、广泛参与、普遍受益的区域合作框架，合力构建开放型亚太经济，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化。我们要引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展，造福不同国家、不同阶层、不同人群。我们要主动适应全球产业分工调整变化，积极引领全球价值链重塑，确立新定位，构筑新优势。我们要支持多边贸易体制，坚持开放的区域主义，帮助发展中成员更多从国际贸易和投资中受益。	
First, we should continue to foster an open economy that benefits all. Openness brings progress, while self-seclusion leaves one behind. We the Asia-Pacific economies know this too well from our own development experience. We should put in place a regional cooperation framework that ensures consultation among equals, wide participation and shared benefits, build an open Asia-Pacific economy and promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation. We should make economic globalization more open, inclusive and balanced so that it benefits different countries and people of different social groups. We should proactively adapt to the evolving international division of labor and actively reshape the global value chain so as to upgrade our economies and build up new strengths. We should support the multilateral trading regime and practice open regionalism to make developing members benefit more from international trade and investment.
建成亚太自由贸易区是亚太工商界多年的梦想。2006年，正是在工商界呼吁下，亚太经合组织成员领导人在河内首次把建设亚太自由贸易区确立为远景目标。2014年，我们在北京启动亚太自由贸易区进程。我们应该行动起来，全面深入落实北京路线图，向着建成亚太自由贸易区的目标不断迈进，为开放型亚太经济提供机制保障。	
The building of a free trade area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) is the long-cherished dream of the business community in our region. It was in response to the call of the business community that APEC leaders, for the first time, initiated the FTAAP vision in Hanoi in 2006. In 2014, the FTAAP process was launched in Beijing. We should get into action, fully implement the Beijing Roadmap, move toward the FTAAP and provide an institutional underpinning for growing an open economy in the Asia-Pacific.
第二，继续谋求创新增长，挖掘发展新动能。当前，世界经济回稳，周期性因素发挥了很大的作用，内生动能不足的顽疾并未消除。世界经济彻底摆脱“新平庸”的风险，只能向创新要动力。	
Second, we should continue to pursue innovation-driven development and create new drivers of growth. The current global economic recovery is, to a large extent, the result of cyclical factors, while the lack of self-generating driving forces remains a nagging problem. To avoid the risk of the global economy entering a "new mediocre", we must sustain growth through innovation.
我们正迎来新一轮科技和产业革命，数字经济、共享经济在全球范围内掀起浪潮，人工智能、量子科学等新技术不断取得突破，亚太不能等待和观望。我们应该抢抓机遇，加大创新投入，转变发展方式，培育新的经济增长点。要积极推进结构性改革，消除一切不利于创新的体制机制障碍，激发市场活力。要落实好北京会议《经济创新发展、改革与增长共识》，深化互联网和数字经济合作，引领全球创新发展的方向。	
The new round of technological and industrial revolutions is unfolding before us. Digital economy and sharing economy are surging worldwide, and breakthroughs have been made in new technologies such as artificial intelligence and quantum science. We in the Asia-Pacific cannot afford to be just onlookers. What we should do is to seize the opportunity, increase input in innovation, change the model of development and nurture new growth areas. We should promote structural reform, remove all institutional and systemic barriers to innovation and energize the market. We should implement the APEC Accord on Innovative Development, Economic Reform and Growth adopted in Beijing, deepen cooperation on the internet and digital economy and strive to be a global leader of innovative growth.
第三，继续加强互联互通，实现联动发展。联动发展是对互利共赢理念的最好诠释。亚太经济体利益交融，联系紧密。坚持联动发展，既能为伙伴提供发展动力，也能为自身创造更大发展空间。2014年，我们制定完成了亚太经合组织互联互通蓝图。我们要以蓝图为指引，建立全方位、多层次、复合型的亚太互联互通网络。要充分发挥互联互通对实体经济的辐射和带动作用，打破发展瓶颈，释放发展潜力，形成协调联动发展的格局。	
Third, we should continue to enhance connectivity and achieve interconnected development. Interconnected development is the best way to achieve mutual benefit and win-win outcome. We the Asia-Pacific economies are closely connected, and our interests are interlocked. Such an interconnected development will both open up new horizon for our own development, and create driving force for us all to achieve common development as partners. In 2014, the APEC Connectivity Blueprint was formulated. This Blueprint should guide our efforts to build a comprehensive, all-round and multi-tiered Asia-Pacific connectivity network. We should boost the real economy through the building of connectivity, break bottlenecks to development and unlock potentials. With these efforts, we can achieve coordinated and interconnected development.
今年5月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举办。共建“一带一路”倡议的核心内涵，就是促进基础设施建设和互联互通，加强经济政策协调和发展战略对接，促进协同联动发展，实现共同繁荣。这一倡议源自中国，更属于世界；根植于历史，更面向未来；重点面向亚欧非大陆，更向所有伙伴开放。我相信，共建“一带一路”倡议的深入推进，将为亚太各方提供更加广阔、更有活力的合作平台！	
In May this year, the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was successfully held in Beijing. The Belt and Road Initiative calls for joint contribution and it has a clear focus, which is to promote infrastructure construction and connectivity, strengthen coordination on economic policies, enhance complementarity of development strategies and boost interconnected development to achieve common prosperity. This initiative is from China, but it belongs to the world. It is rooted in history, but it is oriented toward the future. It focuses on the Asian, European and African continents, but it is open to all partners. I am confident that the launch of the Belt and Road Initiative will create a broader and more dynamic platform for Asia-Pacific cooperation.
第四，继续增强经济发展包容性，让民众共享发展成果。当前，经济全球化进程遭遇逆风，一个重要原因是发展的包容性不足。让不同国家、不同阶层都能享受发展红利，让美好的愿景变为现实，仍需要作出不懈努力。	
Fourth, we should continue to make economic development more inclusive and deliver its benefits to our people. The current headwinds confronting economic globalization is mostly generated by the lack of inclusiveness in development. Hard work is still needed if we are to bring the benefits of development to countries across the globe and people across our society, and thus turn our vision into reality.
过去几年，我们围绕包容发展进行了积极探索，有了坚实的共识基础。我们要结合区域经济一体化的深入推进，做大开放普惠的市场，做强利益共享的链条。我们要把包容共享理念融入发展战略，努力健全讲求效率、注重公平的体制机制，维护社会公平正义。我们要在教育、医疗、就业等民生领域加大投入，解决好贫困、收入差距拉大等问题。我们要加大对弱势群体的扶持力度，改善中小微企业发展环境，增强劳动者适应产业变革的能力，让人人拥有机遇，享有成果！	
Over the past few years, we have actively explored ways to promote inclusive development and have built strong consensus about it. We should deepen regional economic integration, develop an open and inclusive market and strengthen the bond of shared interests. We should make inclusiveness and sharing a part of our development strategies, improve systems and institutions to uphold efficiency and fairness, and safeguard social equity and justice. We should invest more in education, medical care, employment and other areas that are important to people's livelihood, and address poverty and the widening gap between the rich and the poor. We should reach out to disadvantaged groups, improve business environment for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, and enable the workforce to better adapt to industrial transformation, so that everyone will have his fair share of opportunity and benefits.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国古人说：“口言之，身必行之。”实现亚太更大发展，需要每个成员脚踏实地拿出行动。作为全球第二大经济体，中国深知自身肩负的责任。过去5年，我们主动适应、把握、引领经济新常态，深入推进供给侧结构性改革，保持经济稳中向好、稳中有进，推动中国发展不断向着更高质量、更有效率、更加公平、更可持续的方向迈进。过去4年，中国经济平均增长率为7.2%，对世界经济增长的平均贡献率超过30%，成为世界经济的主要动力源。	
As an old Chinese saying goes, a commitment, once made, should be delivered. Boosting development in the Asia-Pacific requires real actions by all of us members. As the world's second largest economy, China knows fully well its responsibility. Over the past five years, we have taken proactive steps to adapt to, manage and steer the new normal of China's economy and deepened supply-side structural reform. As a result, China's economy has maintained steady performance, and we are pursuing better-quality, more efficient, fairer and more sustainable development. Over the past four years, China's economy has grown by 7.2% on the average annually, contributing over 30% of global growth. China is now a main driver powering global growth.
我们通过全面深化改革破除妨碍发展的体制机制障碍，推出360个重大改革方案、1500多项改革举措，一批重要领域和关键环节改革取得突破性进展，主要领域改革主体框架基本确立。我们加快构建开放型经济新体制，转变对外贸易和投资方式，继续推动对外贸易由量的扩张转向质的提升。	
We have worked hard to remove systematical institutional barriers that impede development through comprehensive reform. As many as 360 major reform initiatives and more than 1,500 reform measures have been taken. Breakthroughs have been made in key areas, and general frameworks for reform have been put in place in major sectors. We have sped up efforts to build new institutions of the open economy and transform models of foreign trade and outbound investment to continue the shift from quantitative to qualitative improvement in trade.
我们全方位推进理论创新、实践创新、制度创新、文化创新以及其他各方面创新，不断释放增长新动能。中国正成为各种创新要素发挥集聚效应的广阔平台，不论基础设施还是经济业态，不论商业模式还是消费方式，都迸发出创新的澎湃动能。	
We have advanced theoretical, practical, institutional, cultural and other explorations to unleash new impetus for growth. China has become a huge platform where all factors and players of innovation converge to make a real difference. From infrastructure to various economic sectors, from business models to ways of consumption, innovation is leading the way.
我们深入贯彻以人民为中心的发展思想，努力提升发展的包容性和共享水平。居民收入持续较快增长，连续多年跑赢同期国内生产总值。城乡区域收入分配差距持续缩小，中等收入群体持续扩大，基尼系数下降，每年新增城镇就业已连续4年保持1300万人以上。绿色发展取得显著成效，能源资源消耗强度大幅下降，生态环境治理明显加强。	
We have pursued a people-centered philosophy of development to make our development more inclusive and beneficial to all. Individual income has registered sustained growth, outpacing GDP growth for many years. Income gaps between urban and rural areas and between different regions have been narrowing, middle-income group expanding, and Gini coefficient dropping. More than 13 million new urban jobs have been created every year for four consecutive years. Significant advances have been made in pursuing green development, resulting in considerable reduction in the intensity of energy and resource consumption and marked improvement in the ecological environment.
让所有贫困人口脱贫，是中国政府对人民作出的承诺，也是我牵挂最多、花精力最多的一件事情。过去5年，我走访了全国很多贫困地区，目的是找准致贫的根源，提出管用的举措。中国脱贫攻坚战取得决定性进展。5年来，又有6000多万贫困人口稳定脱贫，贫困发生率持续下降，贫困地区农村居民人均收入保持两位数增长。这一成果来之不易，我们为之感到自豪。	
To lift all the remaining poor people out of poverty is a solemn commitment made by the Chinese government to the people. It is uppermost in my mind, and I have spent more energy on poverty alleviation than anything else. Over the past five years, I have been to many poor areas in China to pin down the causes of poverty and address them in a targeted way. As a result, decisive progress has been made in the fight against poverty. Over the past five years, we have lifted more than 60 million people out of poverty. The poverty headcount ratio has declined, and per capita rural income in poor areas has maintained double-digit growth. This has not come easily, and we are proud of what we have achieved in poverty alleviation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国的发展是一个历史进程。上个月，中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会在北京胜利召开。大会聚焦人民对美好生活的向往，制定了新时代中国特色社会主义的行动纲领和发展蓝图。2020年，中国将全面建成小康社会。到2035年，中国将基本实现社会主义现代化。到本世纪中叶，中国将建成富强民主文明和谐美丽的社会主义现代化强国。在中国共产党领导下，中国人民将开启新征程。	
China's development is an evolving historical process. Last month, the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China was successfully convened in Beijing. Responding to our people's desire for a better life, the Congress formulated a guide to action and a development blueprint for China in the new era. It is envisaged that by 2020, China will turn itself into a moderately prosperous society in all respects, and by 2035, China will basically realize socialist modernization. By the middle of this century, China will become a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally-advanced, harmonious and beautiful. Under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the Chinese people will embark on a new journey.
第一，这是全面深化改革、持续释放发展活力的新征程。解决前进道路上的困难和问题，关键在于全面深化改革。我们将强化问题导向，坚决破除一切不合时宜的思想观念和体制机制弊端，突破利益固化的藩篱，激发全社会创造力和发展活力。我们将构建系统完备、科学规范、运行有效的制度体系，不断推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化。明年，我们将隆重纪念改革开放40周年。中国改革的领域将更广、举措将更多、力度将更强。
First, this is a new journey of deepening reform across the board and unleashing dynamism for development. To resolve difficulties and problems on the way forward, we must deepen all-round reform. We will focus more on solving problems, get rid of all outdated thinking and ideas and all institutional ailments and break through the blockades of vested interests to inspire creativity and vitality throughout society. We will develop a set of institutions that are well conceived, fully built, procedure based, and efficiently functioning and achieve modernization of China's system and capacity for governance. Next year, we will celebrate the 40th anniversary of China's launching of the reform and opening-up initiative. China's reform will cover more areas; and more and stronger steps will be taken in pursuing this endeavor.
第二，这是与时俱进、创新发展方式的新征程。中国经济已经由高速增长阶段转向高质量发展阶段。我们将贯彻新发展理念，坚持质量第一、效益优先，建设现代化经济体系。我们将以供给侧结构性改革为主线，推动经济发展质量变革、效率变革、动力变革，提高全要素生产率，着力加快建设实体经济、科技创新、现代金融、人力资源协同发展的产业体系，着力构建市场机制有效、微观主体有活力、宏观调控有度的经济体制，不断增强经济创新力和竞争力。我们将推动互联网、大数据、人工智能和实体经济深入融合，在数字经济、共享经济、清洁能源等领域培育新的增长动能。我们将不断探索区域协调发展新机制新路径，大力推动京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展，建设雄安新区、粤港澳大湾区，建设世界级城市群，打造新的经济增长极。	
Second, this is a new journey of moving with the times and exploring new model of development. China's economy is in a transition from a phase of rapid growth to a stage of high-quality development. We will be guided by a new development philosophy, put quality first, give priority to performance and develop a modernized economy. We will pursue supply-side structural reform as our main task, work hard to achieve better quality and higher efficiency performance, and create more robust growth through reform. We will raise total factor productivity and accelerate the building of an industrial system that promotes coordinated development of the real economy with technological innovation, modern finance, and a talent pool. We will endeavor to develop an economy with more effective market mechanisms, dynamic micro-entities, and sound macro-regulation. All these efforts will make China's economy more innovative and competitive. We will promote further integration of the internet, big data, and artificial intelligence with the real economy, and cultivate new drivers of growth in digital economy, sharing economy, clean energy and other areas. We will continue to explore new mechanisms and pathways for achieving coordinated development among regions, promote coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, Yangtze Economic Belt, Xiongan New Area, and Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, build world-class city clusters and foster new source of growth.
一个创新步伐加快、发展质量更优的中国，经济新业态不断涌现，创新成果加快转化应用，区域经济实现协同发展，将产生更广泛、更强大的辐射效应，带来更多合作机会，让更多国家搭乘中国发展的快车。	
As China works hard to pursue innovation and higher quality of growth, new forms of business will keep emerging, more innovations will be used, and development of various regions in China will become more balanced. All this will create a more powerful and extensive impact, present more opportunities of cooperation and enable more countries to board the express train of China's development.
第三，这是进一步走向世界、发展更高层次开放型经济的新征程。中国对外开放的脚步不会停滞。我们将同各国一道，深入推进“一带一路”建设，增添共同发展新动力。我们将实行高水平的贸易和投资自由化便利化政策，全面实行准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度，大幅度放宽市场准入，扩大服务业对外开放，保护外商投资合法权益。凡是在中国境内注册的企业，我们都会一视同仁、平等对待。我们将赋予自由贸易试验区更大改革自主权，探索建设自由贸易港。我们将加快同有关国家商签自由贸易协定和投资协定，推动建设亚太自由贸易区，推动区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判尽早结束，构建面向全球的自由贸易区网络。	
Third, this is a new journey toward greater integration with the world and an open economy of higher standards. China will not slow its steps in opening up itself. We will work together with other countries to create new drivers of common development through the launching of the Belt and Road Initiative. We will adopt policies to promote high-standard liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment. We will implement the system of pre-establishment national treatment plus a negative list across the board, significantly ease market access, further open the service sector, and protect the legitimate rights and interests of foreign investors. All businesses registered in China will be treated as equals. We will grant more powers to pilot free trade zones to conduct reform, and explore the opening of free trade ports. We will speed up negotiations with partner countries on the concluding of free trade agreements and investment treaties, advance the building of FTAAP, work for the speedy conclusion of RCEP negotiations, and endeavor to establish a global network of free trade areas.
未来15年，中国市场将进一步扩大，发展将更加全面。预计将进口24万亿美元商品，吸收2万亿美元境外直接投资，对外投资总额将达到2万亿美元。明年11月，我们将在上海举办首届中国国际进口博览会，这将为各方进行开辟中国市场的合作搭建新平台。	
In the next 15 years, China will have an even larger market and more comprehensive development. It is estimated that China will import US$24 trillion worth of goods, attract US$2 trillion inbound direct investment and make US$2 trillion of outbound investment. In November next year, China will hold the first China International Import Expo in Shanghai, which will provide a new platform for expanding cooperation in China's market among all parties.
第四，这是以人民为中心、迈向美好生活的新征程。让人民过上好日子，是我们一切工作的出发点和落脚点。我们将坚持在发展中保障和改善民生，不断满足人民日益增长的美好生活需要，不断促进社会公平正义，使人民获得感、幸福感、安全感更加完善、更有保障、更可持续。我们将持续推进精准扶贫、精准脱贫，实现到2020年我国现行标准下农村贫困人口脱贫的目标。全面建成小康社会，13亿多中国人，一个都不能少！	
Fourth, this is a new journey toward a better life for the people. To secure a better life for our people is what we aim to achieve in everything we do. We will ensure and improve living standards through development and meet people's ever-growing needs for a better life. We will continue to promote social fairness and justice to see that our people will always have a strong sense of gains, happiness, and security. We will continue to implement targeted poverty reduction and alleviation measures and ensure that by the year 2020, all rural residents living below the current poverty line are lifted out of poverty. Each and every one of the over 1.3 billion Chinese people should lead decent lives. No one will be left behind!
我们将加快生态文明体制改革，坚持走绿色、低碳、可持续发展之路，实行最严格的生态环境保护制度。到2035年，中国的生态环境将根本好转，美丽中国目标将基本实现。我们将积极应对气候变化，保护好人类赖以生存的共同家园。中国二氧化碳排放将于2030年左右达到峰值并争取尽早达峰，非化石能源占一次能源消费比重将达到20%左右。只要是认准了的事情，我们都会坚持不懈做下去！	
We will speed up institutional reform for ecological conservation, pursue green, low-carbon and sustainable development, and implement the strictest possible system for environmental protection. By 2035, there will be a fundamental improvement in the environment; the goal of building a Beautiful China will be basically attained. We will actively tackle climate change, and protect our common home for the sake of human survival. China's carbon dioxide emission is expected to peak around 2030, and we will make every effort for such emissions to reach the peak ahead of time. We will increase the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to around 20% by 2030. Once we set a target, we will not stop our efforts until it is met!
第五，这是推动构建新型国际关系、推动构建人类命运共同体的新征程。中国人民的梦想同各国人民的梦想息息相通。当今世界充满挑战，前面的道路不会平坦，但我们不会放弃理想追求，将以更大的作为，同各方携手建设持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。	
Fifth, this is a new journey toward a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind. The dream of us Chinese is closely connected with the dreams of people of other countries. Our world is full of challenges and the road ahead will not be smooth. But we will not give up on our dream. We will double our efforts and work with all others to build an open, inclusive, clean, and beautiful world that enjoys durable peace, universal security, and common prosperity.
中国人民讲求以和为贵、协和万邦。我们将坚持走和平发展道路，始终做世界和亚太地区的和平稳定之锚。我们将秉持正确义利观，积极发展全球伙伴关系，扩大同各国的利益汇合点，推动建设相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系。我们将秉持共商共建共享理念，积极参与全球治理体系改革和建设，推动国际政治经济秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。	
We Chinese believe that peace is most precious and that there should be harmony among all nations. We are committed to peaceful development and we will remain an anchor for peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond. China will, guided by the principle of upholding justice while pursuing shared interests, actively develop global partnerships, expand the convergence of interests with other countries, and work to foster a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, fairness, justice, and win-win cooperation. Acting on the principle of achieving shared growth through consultation and collaboration, we will get actively involved in reforming and developing the global governance system to make the international political and economic order more just and equitable.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
亚太的和平、稳定、繁荣属于全体亚太人民，亚太的未来要靠亚太人民携手创造。互信、包容、合作、共赢的伙伴关系，是亚太大家庭的精神纽带，是确保亚太合作处在正确轨道上的重要保障。让我们脚踏实地推进合作，扎扎实实采取行动，共同建设亚太更加美好的明天！	
All of our people in the Asia-Pacific deserve peace, stability and prosperity; and all of us in the region should jointly deliver a bright future for the Asia-Pacific. Partnerships based on mutual trust, inclusiveness, cooperation and mutual benefit: This is what keeps our big Asia-Pacific family together and ensures the success of Asia-Pacific cooperation. Let us take solid steps to promote cooperation and usher in an even brighter future for the Asia-Pacific.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
70. 习近平主席在联合国日内瓦总部的演讲
共同构建人类命运共同体
——在联合国日内瓦总部的演讲
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2017年1月18日，日内瓦）
Work Together to Build a Community of Shared Future for Mankind
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the United Nations Office at Geneva
Geneva, 18 January 2017
尊敬的联合国大会主席汤姆森先生，
尊敬的联合国秘书长古特雷斯先生，
尊敬的联合国日内瓦总部总干事穆勒先生，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency Mr. Peter Thomson, President of the 71st Session of the UN General Assembly,
Your Excellency Mr. António Guterres, UN Secretary-General,
Your Excellency Mr. Michael Møller, Director-General of the UN Office at Geneva,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
一元复始，万象更新。很高兴在新年伊始就来到联合国日内瓦总部，同大家一起探讨构建人类命运共同体这一时代命题。	
As a new year begins, everything takes on a new look, and it gives me great pleasure to visit the United Nations Office at Geneva and discuss with you the building of a community of shared future for mankind, which is the call of our time.
我刚刚出席了世界经济论坛年会。在达沃斯，各方在发言中普遍谈到，当今世界充满不确定性，人们对未来既寄予期待又感到困惑。世界怎么了、我们怎么办？这是整个世界都在思考的问题，也是我一直在思考的问题。	
I just attended the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting. In Davos, many speakers pointed out in their speeches that today's world is full of uncertainties and that people long for a bright future but are bewildered about what will come. What has happened to the world and how should we respond? The whole world is reflecting on this question, and it is also very much on my mind.
我认为，回答这个问题，首先要弄清楚一个最基本的问题，就是我们从哪里来、现在在哪里、将到哪里去？	
I believe that to answer this question, we need to get clear about a fundamental issue: Where did we come from? Where are we now? And where are we going?
回首最近100多年的历史，人类经历了血腥的热战、冰冷的冷战，也取得了惊人的发展、巨大的进步。上世纪上半叶以前，人类遭受了两次世界大战的劫难，那一代人最迫切的愿望，就是免于战争、缔造和平。上世纪五六十年代，殖民地人民普遍觉醒，他们最强劲的呼声，就是摆脱枷锁、争取独立。冷战结束后，各方最殷切的诉求，就是扩大合作、共同发展。	
Over the past century and more, mankind has gone through bloody hot wars and the chilling Cold War, but also achieved remarkable development and huge progress. In the first half of last century, mankind suffered the scourges of two world wars, and the people yearned for the end of war and the advent of peace. In the 1950s and 1960s, people in colonies awakened and fought to shake off shackles and achieve independence. Since the end of the Cold War, people have pursued a shared aspiration, namely, to expand cooperation and promote common development.
这100多年全人类的共同愿望，就是和平与发展。然而，这项任务至今远远没有完成。我们要顺应人民呼声，接过历史接力棒，继续在和平与发展的马拉松跑道上奋勇向前。	
Peace and development: this has been the aspiration held dear by mankind over the past century. However, the goal to achieve peace and development is far from being met. We need to respond to the people's call, take up the baton of history and forge ahead on the marathon track toward peace and development.
人类正处在大发展大变革大调整时期。世界多极化、经济全球化深入发展，社会信息化、文化多样化持续推进，新一轮科技革命和产业革命正在孕育成长，各国相互联系、相互依存，全球命运与共、休戚相关，和平力量的上升远远超过战争因素的增长，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流更加强劲。	
Mankind is in an era of major development as well as profound transformation and change. The trend toward multi-polarity and economic globalization is surging. IT application in social development and cultural diversity are making continued progress. A new round of scientific and industrial revolution is in the making. Interconnection and interdependence between countries are crucial for human survival. The forces for peace far outweigh factors causing war, and the trend of our times toward peace, development, cooperation and win-win outcomes has gained stronger momentum.
同时，人类也正处在一个挑战层出不穷、风险日益增多的时代。世界经济增长乏力，金融危机阴云不散，发展鸿沟日益突出，兵戎相见时有发生，冷战思维和强权政治阴魂不散，恐怖主义、难民危机、重大传染性疾病、气候变化等非传统安全威胁持续蔓延。	
On the other hand, mankind is also in an era of numerous challenges and increasing risks. Global growth is sluggish, the impact of the financial crisis lingers on and the development gap is widening. Armed conflicts occur from time to time, Cold War mentality and power politics still exist and non-conventional security threats, particularly terrorism, refugee crisis, major communicable diseases and climate change, are spreading.
宇宙只有一个地球，人类共有一个家园。霍金先生提出关于“平行宇宙”的猜想，希望在地球之外找到第二个人类得以安身立命的星球。这个愿望什么时候才能实现还是个未知数。到目前为止，地球是人类唯一赖以生存的家园，珍爱和呵护地球是人类的唯一选择。瑞士联邦大厦穹顶上刻着拉丁文铭文“人人为我，我为人人”。我们要为当代人着想，还要为子孙后代负责。	
There is only one Earth in the universe and we mankind have only one homeland. Stephen Hawking has raised the proposition about "parallel universe", hoping to find another place in the universe where mankind could live. We do not know when his wish will come true. Until today, Earth is still the only home to mankind, so to care for and cherish it is the only option for us mankind. There is a Latin motto inscribed in the dome of the Federal Palace of Switzerland which says "Unus pro omnibus, omnes pro uno" (One for all, and all for one). We should not only think about our own generation, but also take responsibility for future ones.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
让和平的薪火代代相传，让发展的动力源源不断，让文明的光芒熠熠生辉，是各国人民的期待，也是我们这一代政治家应有的担当。中国方案是：构建人类命运共同体，实现共赢共享。	
Pass on the torch of peace from generation to generation, sustain development and make civilization flourish: this is what people of all countries long for; it is also the responsibility statesmen of our generation ought to shoulder. And China's proposition is: build a community of shared future for mankind and achieve shared and win-win development.
理念引领行动，方向决定出路。纵观近代以来的历史，建立公正合理的国际秩序是人类孜孜以求的目标。从360多年前《威斯特伐利亚和约》确立的平等和主权原则，到150多年前日内瓦公约确立的国际人道主义精神；从70多年前联合国宪章明确的四大宗旨和七项原则，到60多年前万隆会议倡导的和平共处五项原则，国际关系演变积累了一系列公认的原则。这些原则应该成为构建人类命运共同体的基本遵循。	
Vision guides action and direction determines the future. As modern history shows, to establish a fair and equitable international order is the goal mankind has always striven for. From the principles of equality and sovereignty established in the Peace of Westphalia over 360 years ago to international humanitarianism affirmed in the Geneva Convention 150-plus years ago; from the four purposes and seven principles enshrined in the UN Charter more than 70 years ago to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence championed by the Bandung Conference over 60 years ago, many principles have emerged in the evolution of international relations and become widely accepted. These principles should guide us in building a community of shared future for mankind.
主权平等，是数百年来国与国规范彼此关系最重要的准则，也是联合国及所有机构、组织共同遵循的首要原则。主权平等，真谛在于国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，主权和尊严必须得到尊重，内政不容干涉，都有权自主选择社会制度和发展道路。在联合国、世界贸易组织、世界卫生组织、世界知识产权组织、世界气象组织、国际电信联盟、万国邮政联盟、国际移民组织、国际劳工组织等机构，各国平等参与决策，构成了完善全球治理的重要力量。新形势下，我们要坚持主权平等，推动各国权利平等、机会平等、规则平等。	
Sovereign equality is the most important norm governing state-to-state relations over the past centuries and the cardinal principle observed by the United Nations and all other international organizations. The essence of sovereign equality is that the sovereignty and dignity of all countries, whether big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, must be respected, their internal affairs allow no interference and they have the right to independently choose their social system and development path. In organizations such as the United Nations, World Trade Organization, World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization, World Meteorological Organization, International Telecommunication Union, Universal Postal Union, International Organization for Migration and International Labor Organization, countries have an equal voice in decision-making, constituting an important force for improving global governance. In a new era, we should uphold sovereign equality and work for equality in right, opportunity and rules for all countries.
日内瓦见证了印度支那和平问题最后宣言的通过，见证了冷战期间两大对峙阵营国家领导人首次和解会议，见证了伊朗核、叙利亚等热点问题对话和谈判。历史和现实给我们的启迪是：沟通协商是化解分歧的有效之策，政治谈判是解决冲突的根本之道。只要怀有真诚愿望，秉持足够善意，展现政治智慧，再大的冲突都能化解，再厚的坚冰都能打破。	
Geneva witnessed the adoption of the Final Declaration on the Problem of Restoring Peace in Indo-China, the first summit meeting for reconciliation between the two blocs during the Cold War and the dialogue and negotiations on hotspot issues like the Iranian nuclear issue and the Syrian issue. What we can learn from both past and present is that dialogue and consultation is an effective way to bridge differences and political negotiation is the fundamental solution to end conflicts. When we have sincere wish, goodwill and political wisdom, no conflict is too big to settle and no ice is too thick to break.
“法者，治之端也”。在日内瓦，各国以联合国宪章为基础，就政治安全、贸易发展、社会人权、科技卫生、劳工产权、文化体育等领域达成了一系列国际公约和法律文书。法律的生命在于付诸实施，各国有责任维护国际法治权威，依法行使权利，善意履行义务。法律的生命也在于公平正义，各国和国际司法机构应该确保国际法平等统一适用，不能搞双重标准，不能“合则用、不合则弃”，真正做到“无偏无党，王道荡荡”。	
An ancient Chinese philosopher said, "Law is the very foundation of governance." Here in Geneva, countries, on the basis of the UN Charter, concluded a number of international conventions and legal documents on political security, trade, development, social issues, human rights, science and technology, health, labor, intellectual property, culture and sports. The relevance of law lies in its enforcement. It is thus incumbent on all countries to uphold the authority of the international rule of law, exercise their rights in accordance with law and fulfill their obligations in good faith. The relevance of law also lies in fairness and justice. All countries and international judicial institutions should ensure equal and uniform application of international law and reject double standards and the practice of applying international law in a selective way, thus ensuring genuine equality and justice in the world.
“海纳百川，有容乃大。”开放包容，筑就了日内瓦多边外交大舞台。我们要推进国际关系民主化，不能搞“一国独霸”或“几方共治”。世界命运应该由各国共同掌握，国际规则应该由各国共同书写，全球事务应该由各国共同治理，发展成果应该由各国共同分享。	
"The ocean is vast because it admits all rivers." Openness and inclusiveness have made Geneva a center of multilateral diplomacy. We should advance democracy in international relations and reject dominance by just one or several countries. All countries should jointly shape the future of the world, write international rules, manage global affairs and ensure that development outcomes are shared by all.
1862年，亨利·杜楠先生在《沙斐利洛的回忆》中追问：能否成立人道主义组织？能否制定人道主义公约？“杜楠之问”很快有了答案，次年，红十字国际委员会应运而生。经过150多年发展，红十字成为一种精神、一面旗帜。面对频发的人道主义危机，我们应该弘扬人道、博爱、奉献的精神，为身陷困境的无辜百姓送去关爱，送去希望；应该秉承中立、公正、独立的基本原则，避免人道主义问题政治化，坚持人道主义援助非军事化。
In 1862, in his book Un Souvenir de Solférino, Henry Dunant pondered the question of whether it is possible to set up humanitarian organizations and conclude humanitarian conventions. The answer came one year later with the founding of the International Committee of the Red Cross. Over the past 150-plus years, the Red Cross has become a symbol and a banner. In the face of frequent humanitarian crises, we should champion the spirit of humanity, compassion and dedication and give love and hope to the innocent people caught in dire situations. We should uphold the basic principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence, refrain from politicizing humanitarian issues and ensure non-militarization of humanitarian assistance.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
大道至简，实干为要。构建人类命运共同体，关键在行动。我认为，国际社会要从伙伴关系、安全格局、经济发展、文明交流、生态建设等方面作出努力。	
Great visions can be realized only through actions. Actions hold the key to building a community of shared future for mankind. To achieve this goal, the international community should promote partnership, security, growth, inter-civilization exchanges and the building of a sound ecosystem.
——坚持对话协商，建设一个持久和平的世界。国家和，则世界安；国家斗，则世界乱。从公元前的伯罗奔尼撒战争到两次世界大战，再到延续40余年的冷战，教训惨痛而深刻。“前事不忘，后事之师。”我们的先辈建立了联合国，为世界赢得70余年相对和平。我们要完善机制和手段，更好化解纷争和矛盾、消弭战乱和冲突。	
-- We should stay committed to building a world of lasting peace through dialogue and consultation. When countries enjoy peace, so will the world; when countries fight, the world suffers. From the Peloponnesian War in the fifth century BC to the two world wars and the Cold War that lasted more than four decades, we have drawn painful and profound lessons. "History, if not forgotten, can serve as a guide for the future." By establishing the United Nations, those before us won more than 70 years of relative peace for the world. What we need to do is to improve the mechanisms and means to more effectively resolve disputes, reduce tension and put an end to wars and conflicts.
瑞士作家、诺贝尔文学奖获得者黑塞说：“不应为战争和毁灭效劳，而应为和平与谅解服务。”国家之间要构建对话不对抗、结伴不结盟的伙伴关系。大国要尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，管控矛盾分歧，努力构建不冲突不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢的新型关系。只要坚持沟通、真诚相处，“修昔底德陷阱”就可以避免。大国对小国要平等相待，不搞唯我独尊、强买强卖的霸道。任何国家都不能随意发动战争，不能破坏国际法治，不能打开潘多拉的盒子。核武器是悬在人类头上的“达摩克利斯之剑”，应该全面禁止并最终彻底销毁，实现无核世界。要秉持和平、主权、普惠、共治原则，把深海、极地、外空、互联网等领域打造成各方合作的新疆域，而不是相互博弈的竞技场。	
The Swiss writer and Nobel laureate Hermann Hesse stressed the importance of serving "not war and destruction but peace and reconciliation". Countries should foster partnerships based on dialogue, non-confrontation and non-alliance. Major powers should respect each other's core interests and major concerns, keep their differences under control and build a new model of relations featuring non-conflict, non-confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation. As long as we maintain communication and treat each other with sincerity, the "Thucydides trap" can be avoided. Big countries should treat smaller ones as equals instead of acting as a hegemon imposing their will on others. No country should open the Pandora's box by willfully waging wars or undermining the international rule of law. Nuclear weapons, the Sword of Damocles that hangs over mankind, should be completely prohibited and thoroughly destroyed over time to make the world free of nuclear weapons. Guided by the principle of peace, sovereignty, inclusiveness and shared governance, we should turn the deep sea, the polar regions, the outer space and the Internet into new frontiers for cooperation rather than a wrestling ground for competition.
——坚持共建共享，建设一个普遍安全的世界。世上没有绝对安全的世外桃源，一国的安全不能建立在别国的动荡之上，他国的威胁也可能成为本国的挑战。邻居出了问题，不能光想着扎好自家篱笆，而应该去帮一把。“单则易折，众则难摧。”各方应该树立共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观。	
-- We should build a world of common security for all through joint efforts. No country in the world can enjoy absolute security. A country cannot have security while others are in turmoil, as threats facing other countries may haunt itself also. When neighbors are in trouble, instead of tightening his own fences, one should extend a helping hand to them. As a saying goes, "United we stand, divided we fall." All countries should pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security.
近年来，在欧洲、北非、中东发生的恐怖袭击事件再次表明，恐怖主义是人类公敌。反恐是各国共同义务，既要治标，更要治本。要加强协调，建立全球反恐统一战线，为各国人民撑起安全伞。当前，难民数量已经创下第二次世界大战结束以来的历史纪录。危机需要应对，根源值得深思。如果不是有家难归，谁会颠沛流离？联合国难民署、国际移民组织等要发挥统筹协调作用，动员全球力量有效应对。中国决定提供2亿元人民币新的人道援助，用于帮助叙利亚难民和流离失所者。恐怖主义、难民危机等问题都同地缘冲突密切相关，化解冲突是根本之策。当事各方要通过协商谈判，其他各方应该积极劝和促谈，尊重联合国发挥斡旋主渠道作用。禽流感、埃博拉、寨卡等疫情不断给国际卫生安全敲响警钟。世界卫生组织要发挥引领作用，加强疫情监测、信息沟通、经验交流、技术分享。国际社会应该加大对非洲等发展中国家卫生事业的支持和援助。	
Terrorist attacks that have occurred in Europe, North Africa and the Middle East in recent years once again demonstrate that terrorism is the common enemy of mankind. Fighting terrorism is the shared responsibility of all countries. In fighting terror, we should not just treat the symptoms, but remove its root causes. We should enhance coordination and build a global united front against terrorism so as to create an umbrella of security for people around the world. The number of refugees has hit a record high since the end of the Second World War. While tackling the crisis, we should also get to its roots. Why would anyone want to be displaced if they have a home to return to? UNHCR and the International Organization for Migration should act as the coordinator to mobilize the whole world to respond effectively to the refugee crisis. China has decided to provide an additional 200 million yuan of humanitarian assistance for refugees and the displaced of Syria. As terrorism and refugee crises are closely linked to geopolitical conflicts, resolving conflicts provides the fundamental solution to such problems. Parties directly involved should return to the negotiating table, and other parties should work to facilitate talks for peace, and we should all respect the role the UN plays as the main channel for mediation. Pandemic diseases such as bird flu, Ebola and Zika have sounded the alarm for international health security. The WHO should play a leadership role in strengthening epidemic monitoring and sharing of information, practices and technologies. The international community should step up support and assistance for public health in African countries and other developing countries.
——坚持合作共赢，建设一个共同繁荣的世界。发展是第一要务，适用于各国。各国要同舟共济，而不是以邻为壑。各国特别是主要经济体要加强宏观政策协调，兼顾当前和长远，着力解决深层次问题。要抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革的历史性机遇，转变经济发展方式，坚持创新驱动，进一步发展社会生产力、释放社会创造力。要维护世界贸易组织规则，支持开放、透明、包容、非歧视性的多边贸易体制，构建开放型世界经济。如果搞贸易保护主义、画地为牢，损人不利己。	
-- We should build a world of common prosperity through win-win cooperation. Development is the top priority for all countries. Instead of beggaring thy neighbor, countries should stick together like passengers in the same boat. All countries, the main economies in particular, should strengthen macro policy coordination, pursue both current and long-term interests and focus on resolving deep-seated problems. We should seize the historic opportunity presented by the new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation, shift growth models, drive growth through innovation and further unleash social productivity and social creativity. We should uphold WTO rules, support an open, transparent, inclusive and nondiscriminatory multilateral trading regime and build an open world economy. Trade protectionism and self-isolation will benefit no one.
经济全球化是历史大势，促成了贸易大繁荣、投资大便利、人员大流动、技术大发展。本世纪初以来，在联合国主导下，借助经济全球化，国际社会制定和实施了千年发展目标和2030年可持续发展议程，推动11亿人口脱贫，19亿人口获得安全饮用水，35亿人口用上互联网等，还将在2030年实现零贫困。这充分说明，经济全球化的大方向是正确的。当然，发展失衡、治理困境、数字鸿沟、公平赤字等问题也客观存在。这些是前进中的问题，我们要正视并设法解决，但不能因噎废食。	
Economic globalization, a surging historical trend, has greatly facilitated trade, investment, flow of people and technological advances. Since the turn of the century, under the auspices of the UN and riding on the waves of economic globalization, the international community has set the Millennium Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Thanks to these initiatives, 1.1 billion people have been lifted out of poverty, 1.9 billion people now have access to safe drinking water, 3.5 billion people have gained access to the Internet, and the goal has been set to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. All this demonstrates that economic globalization is moving in the right direction. Of course, challenges such as development disparity, governance dilemma, digital divide and equity deficit still exist. But they are growing pains. We should face these problems and tackle them, instead of taking no action, as we Chinese like to say, one should not stop eating for fear of getting choked.
我们要从历史中汲取智慧。历史学家早就断言，经济快速发展使社会变革成为必需，经济发展易获支持，而社会变革常遭抵制。我们不能因此踟蹰不前，而要砥砺前行。我们也要从现实中寻找答案。2008年爆发的国际金融危机启示我们，引导经济全球化健康发展，需要加强协调、完善治理，推动建设一个开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，既要做大蛋糕，更要分好蛋糕，着力解决公平公正问题。	
We should draw inspiration from history. Historians told us long ago that rapid economic development makes social reform necessary; but people tend to support the former while rejecting the latter. Instead of watching in hesitation, we should move forward against all odds. Answers can also be found in reality. The 2008 international financial crisis teaches us that we should strengthen coordination and improve governance so as to ensure sound growth of economic globalization and make it open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. We should both make the cake bigger and share it fairly to ensure justice and equity.
去年9月，二十国集团领导人杭州峰会聚焦全球经济治理等重大问题，通过《创新增长蓝图》，首次将发展问题纳入全球宏观政策框架，并制定了行动计划。	
Last September, the G20 Summit in Hangzhou focused on global economic governance and other major issues, adopted the Blueprint on Innovative Growth, put development for the first time in global macro policy framework, and formulated an action plan.
——坚持交流互鉴，建设一个开放包容的世界。“和羹之美，在于合异。”人类文明多样性是世界的基本特征，也是人类进步的源泉。世界上有200多个国家和地区、2500多个民族、多种宗教。不同历史和国情，不同民族和习俗，孕育了不同文明，使世界更加丰富多彩。文明没有高下、优劣之分，只有特色、地域之别。文明差异不应该成为世界冲突的根源，而应该成为人类文明进步的动力。	
-- We should build an open and inclusive world through exchanges and mutual learning. Delicious soup is made by combining different ingredients. Diversity of human civilizations not only defines our world, but also drives progress of mankind. There are more than 200 countries and regions, over 2,500 ethnic groups and multiple religions in our world. Different histories, national conditions, ethnic groups and customs give birth to different civilizations and make the world a colorful one. There is no such thing as a superior or inferior civilization, and civilizations are different only in identity and location. Diversity of civilizations should not be a source of global conflict; rather, it should be an engine driving the advance of human civilizations.
每种文明都有其独特魅力和深厚底蕴，都是人类的精神瑰宝。不同文明要取长补短、共同进步，让文明交流互鉴成为推动人类社会进步的动力、维护世界和平的纽带。	
Every civilization, with its own appeal and root, is a human treasure. Diverse civilizations should draw on each other to achieve common progress. We should make exchanges among civilizations a source of inspiration for advancing human society and a bond that keeps the world in peace.
——坚持绿色低碳，建设一个清洁美丽的世界。人与自然共生共存，伤害自然最终将伤及人类。空气、水、土壤、蓝天等自然资源用之不觉、失之难续。工业化创造了前所未有的物质财富，也产生了难以弥补的生态创伤。我们不能吃祖宗饭、断子孙路，用破坏性方式搞发展。绿水青山就是金山银山。我们应该遵循天人合一、道法自然的理念，寻求永续发展之路。	
-- We should make our world clean and beautiful by pursuing green and low-carbon development. Man coexists with nature, which means that any harm to nature will eventually come back to haunt man. We hardly notice natural resources such as air, water, soil and blue sky when we have them. But we won't be able to survive without them. Industrialization has created material wealth never seen before, but it has also inflicted irreparable damage to the environment. We must not exhaust all the resources passed on to us by previous generations and leave nothing to our children or pursue development in a destructive way. Clear waters and green mountains are as good as mountains of gold and silver. We must maintain harmony between man and nature and pursue sustainable development.
我们要倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的生产生活方式，平衡推进2030年可持续发展议程，不断开拓生产发展、生活富裕、生态良好的文明发展道路。《巴黎协定》的达成是全球气候治理史上的里程碑。我们不能让这一成果付诸东流。各方要共同推动协定实施。中国将继续采取行动应对气候变化，百分之百承担自己的义务。	
We should pursue green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable way of life and production, advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in a balanced manner and explore a model of sound development that ensures growth, better lives and a good environment. The Paris Agreement is a milestone in the history of climate governance. We must ensure this endeavor is not derailed. All parties should work together to implement the Paris Agreement. China will continue to take steps to tackle climate change and fully honor its obligations.
瑞士军刀是瑞士“工匠精神”的产物。我第一次得到一把瑞士军刀时，我就很佩服人们能赋予它那么多功能。我想，如果我们能为我们这个世界打造一把精巧的瑞士军刀就好了，人类遇到了什么问题，就用其中一个工具来解决它。我相信，只要国际社会不懈努力，这样一把瑞士军刀是可以打造出来的。	
Swiss army knife embodies Swiss craftsmanship. When I first got one, I was amazed that it has so many functions. I cannot help thinking how wonderful it would be if an exquisite Swiss army knife could be made for our world. When there is a problem, we can use one of the tools on the knife to fix it. I believe that with unremitting efforts of the international community, such a knife can be made.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国人始终认为，世界好，中国才能好；中国好，世界才更好。面向未来，很多人关心中国的政策走向，国际社会也有很多议论。在这里，我给大家一个明确的回答。	
For us Chinese, China will do well only when the world does well, and vice versa. Many people are quite interested in what policies China will pursue, and we have heard various views. Here, I wish to give you an explicit answer.
第一，中国维护世界和平的决心不会改变。中华文明历来崇尚“以和邦国”、“和而不同”、“以和为贵”。中国《孙子兵法》是一部著名兵书，但其第一句话就讲：“兵者，国之大事，死生之地，存亡之道，不可不察也”，其要义是慎战、不战。几千年来，和平融入了中华民族的血脉中，刻进了中国人民的基因里。	
First, China remains unchanged in its commitment to uphold world peace. Amity with neighbors, harmony without uniformity and peace are values cherished in the Chinese culture. The Art of War, a Chinese classic, begins with this observation, "The art of war is of vital importance to the State. It is a matter of life and death, a road to either survival or ruin. Hence it demands careful study." What it means is that every effort should be made to prevent a war and great caution must be exercised when it comes to fighting a war. For several millennia, peace has been in the blood of us Chinese and a part of our DNA.
数百年前，即使中国强盛到国内生产总值占世界30%的时候，也从未对外侵略扩张。1840年鸦片战争后的100多年里，中国频遭侵略和蹂躏之害，饱受战祸和动乱之苦。孔子说，己所不欲，勿施于人。中国人民深信，只有和平安宁才能繁荣发展。	
Several centuries ago, China was strong and its GDP accounted for 30% of the global total. Even then, China was never engaged in aggression or expansion. In over 100 years after the 1840 Opium War, China suffered immensely from aggression, wars and chaos. Confucius said, "Do not do to others what you do not want others to do to you." We Chinese firmly believe that peace and stability is the only way to development and prosperity.
中国从一个积贫积弱的国家发展成为世界第二大经济体，靠的不是对外军事扩张和殖民掠夺，而是人民勤劳、维护和平。中国将始终不渝走和平发展道路。无论中国发展到哪一步，中国永不称霸、永不扩张、永不谋求势力范围。历史已经并将继续证明这一点。	
China has grown from a poor and weak country to the world's second largest economy not by committing military expansion or colonial plunder, but through the hard work of its people and our efforts to uphold peace. China will never waver in its pursuit of peaceful development. No matter how strong its economy grows, China will never seek hegemony, expansion or sphere of influence. History has borne this out and will continue to do so.
第二，中国促进共同发展的决心不会改变。中国有句古语叫“落其实思其树，饮其流怀其源”。中国发展得益于国际社会，中国也为全球发展作出了贡献。中国将继续奉行互利共赢的开放战略，将自身发展机遇同世界各国分享，欢迎各国搭乘中国发展的“顺风车”。	
Second, China remains unchanged in its commitment to pursue common development. An old Chinese saying goes, when you reap fruits, you should remember the tree; when you drink water, you should remember its source. China's development has been possible because of the world, and China has contributed to the world's development. We will continue to pursue a win-win strategy of opening-up, share our development opportunities with other countries and welcome them aboard the fast train of China's development.
1950年至2016年，中国累计对外提供援款4000多亿元人民币，今后将继续在力所能及的范围内加大对外帮扶。国际金融危机爆发以来，中国经济增长对世界经济增长的贡献率年均在30%以上。未来5年，中国将进口8万亿美元的商品，吸收6000亿美元的外来投资，中国对外投资总额将达到7500亿美元，出境旅游将达到7亿人次。这将为世界各国发展带来更多机遇。	
Between 1950 and 2016, China provided foreign countries with over 400 billion yuan of aid, and we will continue to increase assistance to others as its ability permits. Since the outbreak of the international financial crisis, China has contributed to over 30% of global growth each year on average. In the coming five years, China will import eight trillion US dollars of goods, attract 600 billion US dollars of foreign investment, make 750 billion US dollars of outbound investment, and Chinese tourists will make 700 million outbound visits. All this will bring more development opportunities to other countries.
中国坚持走符合本国国情的发展道路，始终把人民权利放在首位，不断促进和保护人权。中国解决了13亿多人口的温饱问题，让7亿多人口摆脱贫困，这是对世界人权事业的重大贡献。我提出“一带一路”倡议，就是要实现共赢共享发展。目前，已经有100多个国家和国际组织积极响应支持，一大批早期收获项目落地开花。中国支持建设好亚洲基础设施投资银行等新型多边金融机构，为国际社会提供更多公共产品。
China pursues a path of development in keeping with its national conditions. We always put people's rights and interests above everything else and have worked hard to advance and uphold human rights. China has met the basic living needs of its 1.3 billion-plus people and lifted over 700 million people out of poverty, which is a significant contribution to the global cause of human rights. The Belt and Road initiative I put forward aims to achieve win-win and shared development. Over 100 countries and international organizations have supported the initiative, and a large number of early harvest projects have been launched. China supports the successful operation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and other new multilateral financial institutions in order to provide more public goods to the international community.
第三，中国打造伙伴关系的决心不会改变。中国坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，在和平共处五项原则基础上同所有国家发展友好合作。中国率先把建立伙伴关系确定为国家间交往的指导原则，同90多个国家和区域组织建立了不同形式的伙伴关系。中国将进一步联结遍布全球的“朋友圈”。	
Third, China remains unchanged in its commitment to foster partnerships. China pursues an independent foreign policy of peace, and is ready to enhance friendship and cooperation with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. China is the first country to make partnership-building a principle guiding state-to-state relations. It has formed partnerships of various forms with over 90 countries and regional organizations, and will build a circle of friends across the world.
中国将努力构建总体稳定、均衡发展的大国关系框架，积极同美国发展新型大国关系，同俄罗斯发展全面战略协作伙伴关系，同欧洲发展和平、增长、改革、文明伙伴关系，同金砖国家发展团结合作的伙伴关系。中国将继续坚持正确义利观，深化同发展中国家务实合作，实现同呼吸、共命运、齐发展。中国将按照亲诚惠容理念同周边国家深化互利合作，秉持真实亲诚对非政策理念同非洲国家共谋发展，推动中拉全面合作伙伴关系实现新发展。	
China will endeavor to put in place a framework of relations with major powers featuring general stability and balanced growth. We will strive to build a new model of major country relations with the United States, a comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination with Russia, partnership for peace, growth, reform and among different civilizations with Europe, and a partnership of unity and cooperation with BRICS countries. China will continue to uphold justice and friendship and pursue shared interests, and boost pragmatic cooperation with other developing countries to achieve common development. We will further enhance mutually beneficial cooperation with our neighbors under the principle of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness. We will pursue common development with African countries in a spirit of sincerity, being result oriented, affinity and good faith. And we will elevate our comprehensive cooperative partnership with Latin America to a higher level.
第四，中国支持多边主义的决心不会改变。多边主义是维护和平、促进发展的有效路径。长期以来，联合国等国际机构做了大量工作，为维护世界总体和平、持续发展的态势作出了有目共睹的贡献。	
Fourth, China remains unchanged in its commitment to multilateralism. Multilateralism is an effective way to preserve peace and promote development. For decades, the United Nations and other international institutions have made a universally recognized contribution to maintaining global peace and sustaining development.
中国是联合国创始成员国，是第一个在联合国宪章上签字的国家。中国将坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，坚定维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基石的国际关系基本准则，坚定维护联合国权威和地位，坚定维护联合国在国际事务中的核心作用。	
China is a founding member of the United Nations and the first country to put its signature on the UN Charter. China will firmly uphold the international system with the UN as its core, the basic norms governing international relations embodied in the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, the authority and stature of the UN, and its core role in international affairs.
中国－联合国和平与发展基金已经正式投入运营，中国将把资金优先用于联合国及日内瓦相关国际机构提出的和平与发展项目。随着中国持续发展，中国支持多边主义的力度也将越来越大。	
The China-UN Peace and Development Fund has been officially inaugurated. We will make funds available to peace and development oriented programs proposed by the UN and its agencies in Geneva on a priority basis. China's support for multilateralism will increase as the country continues to develop itself.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
对中国来讲，日内瓦具有一份特殊的记忆和情感。1954年，周恩来总理率团出席日内瓦会议，同苏联、美国、英国、法国等共同讨论政治解决朝鲜问题和印度支那停战问题，展现和平精神，为世界和平贡献了中国智慧。1971年，中国恢复在联合国的合法席位、重返日内瓦国际机构后，逐步参与裁军、经贸、人权、社会等各领域事务，为重大问题解决和重要规则制定提供了中国方案。近年来，中国积极参与伊朗核、叙利亚等热点问题的对话和谈判，为推动政治解决作出了中国贡献。中国先后成功向国际奥委会申办夏季和冬季两届奥运会和残奥会，中国10多项世界自然遗产和文化自然双重遗产申请得到世界自然保护联盟支持，呈现了中国精彩。	
Geneva invokes a special memory to us. In 1954, Premier Zhou Enlai led a Chinese delegation to the Geneva Conference, and worked with the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom and France to seek political settlement of the Korean issue and a ceasefire in Indo-China. This demonstrated China's desire for peace and contributed Chinese wisdom to world peace. Since 1971 when China regained its lawful seat in the UN and began to return to international agencies in Geneva, China has gradually involved itself in disarmament, trade, development, human rights and social issues, putting forth Chinese proposals for the resolution of major issues and the making of important rules. In recent years, China has taken an active part in dialogues and negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue, the Syrian issue and other hotspot issues, giving Chinese input to their political settlement. China applied to the International Olympic Committee to host both the summer and winter Olympic and Paralympic Games, and we have won the bids. In addition, we have gained endorsement from the International Union for Conservation of Nature for over a dozen applications for world natural heritage sites as well as world cultural and natural heritage sites. All this has presented Chinese splendor to the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国古人说：“善学者尽其理，善行者究其难。”构建人类命运共同体是一个美好的目标，也是一个需要一代又一代人接力跑才能实现的目标。中国愿同广大成员国、国际组织和机构一道，共同推进构建人类命运共同体的伟大进程。	
The ancient Chinese believed that "one should be good at finding the laws of things and solving problems". Building a community of shared future is an exciting goal, and it requires efforts from generation after generation. China is ready to work with all the other UN member states as well as international organizations and agencies to advance the great cause of building a community of shared future for mankind.
1月28日，中国人民将迎来农历丁酉新年，也就是鸡年春节。鸡年寓意光明和吉祥。“金鸡一唱千门晓。”我祝大家新春快乐、万事如意！	
On 28 January, we Chinese will celebrate the Chinese New Year, the Year of the Rooster. The rooster symbolizes bright prospects and auspiciousness. As a Chinese saying goes, the crow of the golden rooster heralds a great day for all. With that, I wish you all the very best and a very happy Chinese New Year!
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
68. 习近平在“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的演讲
携手推进“一带一路”建设
——在“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的演讲
（2017年5月14日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together to Build the Silk Road Economic Belt and The 21st Century Maritime Silk Road
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation
14 May 2017
尊敬的各位国家元首，政府首脑，
各位国际组织负责人，
女士们，先生们，
朋友们：	
Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Heads of International Organizations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
“孟夏之日，万物并秀。”在这美好时节，来自100多个国家的各界嘉宾齐聚北京，共商“一带一路”建设合作大计，具有十分重要的意义。今天，群贤毕至，少长咸集，我期待着大家集思广益、畅所欲言，为推动“一带一路”建设献计献策，让这一世纪工程造福各国人民。	
In this lovely season of early Summer when every living thing is full of energy, I wish to welcome all of you, distinguished guests representing over 100 countries, to attend this important forum on the Belt and Road Initiative held in Beijing. This is indeed a gathering of great minds. In the coming two days, I hope that by engaging in full exchanges of views, we will contribute to pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, a project of the century, so that it will benefit people across the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
2000多年前，我们的先辈筚路蓝缕，穿越草原沙漠，开辟出联通亚欧非的陆上丝绸之路；我们的先辈扬帆远航，穿越惊涛骇浪，闯荡出连接东西方的海上丝绸之路。古丝绸之路打开了各国友好交往的新窗口，书写了人类发展进步的新篇章。中国陕西历史博物馆珍藏的千年“鎏金铜蚕”，在印度尼西亚发现的千年沉船“黑石号”等，见证了这段历史。	
Over 2,000 years ago, our ancestors, trekking across vast steppes and deserts, opened the transcontinental passage connecting Asia, Europe and Africa, known today as the Silk Road. Our ancestors, navigating rough seas, created sea routes linking the East with the West, namely, the maritime Silk Road. These ancient silk routes opened windows of friendly engagement among nations, adding a splendid chapter to the history of human progress. The thousand-year-old "gilt bronze silkworm" displayed at China's Shaanxi History Museum and the Belitung shipwreck discovered in Indonesia bear witness to this exciting period of history.
古丝绸之路绵亘万里，延续千年，积淀了以和平合作、开放包容、互学互鉴、互利共赢为核心的丝路精神。这是人类文明的宝贵遗产。	
Spanning thousands of miles and years, the ancient silk routes embody the spirit of peace and cooperation, openness and inclusiveness, mutual learning and mutual benefit. The Silk Road spirit has become a great heritage of human civilization.
——和平合作。公元前140多年的中国汉代，一支从长安出发的和平使团，开始打通东方通往西方的道路，完成了“凿空之旅”，这就是著名的张骞出使西域。中国唐宋元时期，陆上和海上丝绸之路同步发展，中国、意大利、摩洛哥的旅行家杜环、马可·波罗、伊本·白图泰都在陆上和海上丝绸之路留下了历史印记。15世纪初的明代，中国著名航海家郑和七次远洋航海，留下千古佳话。这些开拓事业之所以名垂青史，是因为使用的不是战马和长矛，而是驼队和善意；依靠的不是坚船和利炮，而是宝船和友谊。一代又一代“丝路人”架起了东西方合作的纽带、和平的桥梁。	
-- Peace and cooperation. In China's Han Dynasty around 140 B.C., Zhang Qian, a royal emissary, left Chang'an, capital of the Han Dynasty. He traveled westward on a mission of peace and opened an overland route linking the East and the West, a daring undertaking which came to be known as Zhang Qian's journey to the Western regions. Centuries later, in the years of Tang, Song and Yuan Dynasties, such silk routes, both over land and at sea, boomed. Great adventurers, including Du Huan of China, Marco Polo of Italy and ibn Batutah of Morocco, left their footprints along these ancient routes. In the early 15th century, Zheng He, the famous Chinese navigator in the Ming Dynasty, made seven voyages to the Western Seas, a feat which still is remembered today. These pioneers won their place in history not as conquerors with warships, guns or swords. Rather, they are remembered as friendly emissaries leading camel caravans and sailing treasure-loaded ships. Generation after generation, the silk routes travelers have built a bridge for peace and East-West cooperation.
——开放包容。古丝绸之路跨越尼罗河流域、底格里斯河和幼发拉底河流域、印度河和恒河流域、黄河和长江流域，跨越埃及文明、巴比伦文明、印度文明、中华文明的发祥地，跨越佛教、基督教、伊斯兰教信众的汇集地，跨越不同国度和肤色人民的聚居地。不同文明、宗教、种族求同存异、开放包容，并肩书写相互尊重的壮丽诗篇，携手绘就共同发展的美好画卷。酒泉、敦煌、吐鲁番、喀什、撒马尔罕、巴格达、君士坦丁堡等古城，宁波、泉州、广州、北海、科伦坡、吉达、亚历山大等地的古港，就是记载这段历史的“活化石”。历史告诉我们：文明在开放中发展，民族在融合中共存。	
-- Openness and inclusiveness. The ancient silk routes spanned the valleys of the Nile, the Tigris and Euphrates, the Indus and Ganges and the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers. They connected the birthplaces of the Egyptian, Babylonian, Indian and Chinese civilizations as well as the lands of Buddhism, Christianity and Islam and homes of people of different nationalities and races. These routes enabled people of various civilizations, religions and races to interact with and embrace each other with open mind. In the course of exchange, they fostered a spirit of mutual respect and were engaged in a common endeavor to pursue prosperity. Today, ancient cities of Jiuquan, Dunhuang, Tulufan, Kashi, Samarkand, Baghdad and Constantinople as well as ancient ports of Ningbo, Quanzhou, Guangzhou, Beihai, Colombo, Jeddah and Alexandria stand as living monuments to these past interactions. This part of history shows that civilization thrives with openness and nations prosper through exchange.
——互学互鉴。古丝绸之路不仅是一条通商易货之道，更是一条知识交流之路。沿着古丝绸之路，中国将丝绸、瓷器、漆器、铁器传到西方，也为中国带来了胡椒、亚麻、香料、葡萄、石榴。沿着古丝绸之路，佛教、伊斯兰教及阿拉伯的天文、历法、医药传入中国，中国的四大发明、养蚕技术也由此传向世界。更为重要的是，商品和知识交流带来了观念创新。比如，佛教源自印度，在中国发扬光大，在东南亚得到传承。儒家文化起源中国，受到欧洲莱布尼茨、伏尔泰等思想家的推崇。这是交流的魅力、互鉴的成果。	
-- Mutual learning. The ancient silk routes were not for trade only, they boosted flow of knowledge as well. Through these routes, Chinese silk, porcelain, lacquerwork and ironware were shipped to the West, while pepper, flax, spices, grape and pomegranate entered China. Through these routes, Buddhism, Islam and Arab astronomy, calendar and medicine found their way to China, while China's four great inventions and silkworm breeding spread to other parts of the world. More importantly, the exchange of goods and know-how spurred new ideas. For example, Buddhism originated in India, blossomed in China and was enriched in Southeast Asia. Confucianism, which was born in China, gained appreciation by European thinkers such as Leibniz and Voltaire. Herein lies the appeal of mutual learning.
——互利共赢。古丝绸之路见证了陆上“使者相望于道，商旅不绝于途”的盛况，也见证了海上“舶交海中，不知其数”的繁华。在这条大动脉上，资金、技术、人员等生产要素自由流动，商品、资源、成果等实现共享。阿拉木图、撒马尔罕、长安等重镇和苏尔港、广州等良港兴旺发达，罗马、安息、贵霜等古国欣欣向荣，中国汉唐迎来盛世。古丝绸之路创造了地区大发展大繁荣。	
-- Mutual benefit. The ancient silk routes witnessed the bustling scenes of visits and trade over land and ships calling at ports. Along these major arteries of interaction, capital, technology and people flowed freely, and goods, resources and benefits were widely shared. The ancient prosperous cities of Alma-Ata, Samarkand and Chang'an and ports of Sur and Guangzhou thrived, so did the Roman Empire as well as Parthia and Kushan Kingdoms. The Han and Tang Dynasties of China entered the golden age. The ancient silk routes brought prosperity to these regions and boosted their development.
历史是最好的老师。这段历史表明，无论相隔多远，只要我们勇敢迈出第一步，坚持相向而行，就能走出一条相遇相知、共同发展之路，走向幸福安宁和谐美好的远方。	
History is our best teacher. The glory of the ancient silk routes shows that geographical distance is not insurmountable. If we take the first courageous step towards each other, we can embark on a path leading to friendship, shared development, peace, harmony and a better future.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
从历史维度看，人类社会正处在一个大发展大变革大调整时代。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，和平发展的大势日益强劲，变革创新的步伐持续向前。各国之间的联系从来没有像今天这样紧密，世界人民对美好生活的向往从来没有像今天这样强烈，人类战胜困难的手段从来没有像今天这样丰富。	
From the historical perspective, humankind has reached an age of great progress, great transformation and profound changes. In this increasingly multi-polar, economically globalized, digitized and culturally diversified world, the trend toward peace and development becomes stronger, and reform and innovation are gaining momentum. Never have we seen such close interdependence among countries as today, such fervent desire of people for a better life, and never have we had so many means to prevail over difficulties.
从现实维度看，我们正处在一个挑战频发的世界。世界经济增长需要新动力，发展需要更加普惠平衡，贫富差距鸿沟有待弥合。地区热点持续动荡，恐怖主义蔓延肆虐。和平赤字、发展赤字、治理赤字，是摆在全人类面前的严峻挑战。这是我一直思考的问题。	
In terms of reality, we find ourselves in a world fraught with challenges. Global growth requires new drivers, development needs to be more inclusive and balanced, and the gap between the rich and the poor needs to be narrowed. Hotspots in some regions are causing instability and terrorism is rampant. Deficit in peace, development and governance poses a daunting challenge to mankind. This is the issue that has always been on my mind.
2013年秋天，我在哈萨克斯坦和印度尼西亚提出共建丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路，即“一带一路”倡议。“桃李不言，下自成蹊。”4年来，全球100多个国家和国际组织积极支持和参与“一带一路”建设，联合国大会、联合国安理会等重要决议也纳入“一带一路”建设内容。“一带一路”建设逐渐从理念转化为行动，从愿景转变为现实，建设成果丰硕。	
In the autumn of 2013, respectively in Kazakhstan and Indonesia, I proposed the building of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, which I call the Belt and Road Initiative. As a Chinese saying goes, "Peaches and plums do not speak, but they are so attractive that a path is formed below the trees." Four years on, over 100 countries and international organizations have supported and got involved in this initiative. Important resolutions passed by the UN General Assembly and Security Council contain reference to it. Thanks to our efforts, the vision of the Belt and Road Initiative is becoming a reality and bearing rich fruit.
——这是政策沟通不断深化的4年。我多次说过，“一带一路”建设不是另起炉灶、推倒重来，而是实现战略对接、优势互补。我们同有关国家协调政策，包括俄罗斯提出的欧亚经济联盟、东盟提出的互联互通总体规划、哈萨克斯坦提出的“光明之路”、土耳其提出的“中间走廊”、蒙古提出的“发展之路”、越南提出的“两廊一圈”、英国提出的“英格兰北方经济中心”、波兰提出的“琥珀之路”等。中国同老挝、柬埔寨、缅甸、匈牙利等国的规划对接工作也全面展开。中国同40多个国家和国际组织签署了合作协议，同30多个国家开展机制化产能合作。本次论坛期间，我们还将签署一批对接合作协议和行动计划，同60多个国家和国际组织共同发出推进“一带一路”贸易畅通合作倡议。各方通过政策对接，实现了“一加一大于二”的效果。	
-- These four years have seen deepened policy connectivity. I have said on many occasions that the pursuit of the Belt and Road Initiative is not meant to reinvent the wheel. Rather, it aims to complement the development strategies of countries involved by leveraging their comparative strengths. We have enhanced coordination with the policy initiatives of relevant countries, such as the Eurasian Economic Union of Russia, the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity, the Bright Road initiative of Kazakhstan, the Middle Corridor initiative of Turkey, the Development Road initiative of Mongolia, the Two Corridors, One Economic Circle initiative of Viet Nam, the Northern Powerhouse initiative of the UK and the Amber Road initiative of Poland. We are also promoting complementarity between China's development plan and those of Laos, Cambodia, Myanmar, Hungary and other countries. China has signed cooperation agreements with over 40 countries and international organizations and carried out framework cooperation on production capacity with more than 30 countries. During the forum, a number of cooperation agreements on policy connectivity and action plans will be signed. We will also launch Belt and Road cooperation initiative on trade connectivity together with some 60 countries and international organizations. Such policy connectivity will produce a multiplying effect on cooperation among the parties involved.
——这是设施联通不断加强的4年。“道路通，百业兴。”我们和相关国家一道共同加速推进雅万高铁、中老铁路、亚吉铁路、匈塞铁路等项目，建设瓜达尔港、比雷埃夫斯港等港口，规划实施一大批互联互通项目。目前，以中巴、中蒙俄、新亚欧大陆桥等经济走廊为引领，以陆海空通道和信息高速路为骨架，以铁路、港口、管网等重大工程为依托，一个复合型的基础设施网络正在形成。	
-- These four years have seen enhanced infrastructure connectivity. Building roads and railways creates prosperity in all sectors. We have accelerated the building of Jakarta-Bandung high-speed railway, China-Laos railway, Addis Ababa-Djibouti railway and Hungary-Serbia railway, and upgraded Gwadar and Piraeus ports in cooperation with relevant countries. A large number of connectivity projects are also in the pipeline. Today, a multi-dimensional infrastructure network is taking shape, one that is underpinned by economic corridors such as China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, China-Mongolia-Russia Economic Corridor and the New Eurasian Continental Bridge, featuring land-sea-air transportation routes and information expressway and supported by major railway, port and pipeline projects.
——这是贸易畅通不断提升的4年。中国同“一带一路”参与国大力推动贸易和投资便利化，不断改善营商环境。我了解到，仅哈萨克斯坦等中亚国家农产品到达中国市场的通关时间就缩短了90%。2014年至2016年，中国同“一带一路”沿线国家贸易总额超过3万亿美元。中国对“一带一路”沿线国家投资累计超过500亿美元。中国企业已经在20多个国家建设56个经贸合作区，为有关国家创造近11亿美元税收和18万个就业岗位。	
-- These four years have seen increased trade connectivity. China has worked with other countries involved in the Belt and Road Initiative to promote trade and investment facilitation and improve business environment. I was told that for Kazakhstan and other Central Asian countries alone, customs clearance time for agricultural produce exporting to China is cut by 90%. Total trade between China and other Belt and Road countries in 2014-2016 has exceeded US$3 trillion, and China's investment in these countries has surpassed US$50 billion. Chinese companies have set up 56 economic cooperation zones in over 20 countries, generating some US$1.1 billion of tax revenue and 180,000 jobs for them.
——这是资金融通不断扩大的4年。融资瓶颈是实现互联互通的突出挑战。中国同“一带一路”建设参与国和组织开展了多种形式的金融合作。亚洲基础设施投资银行已经为“一带一路”建设参与国的9个项目提供17亿美元贷款，“丝路基金”投资达40亿美元，中国同中东欧“16+1”金融控股公司正式成立。这些新型金融机制同世界银行等传统多边金融机构各有侧重、互为补充，形成层次清晰、初具规模的“一带一路”金融合作网络。	
-- These four years have seen expanded financial connectivity. Financing bottleneck is a key challenge to realizing connectivity. China has engaged in multiple forms of financial cooperation with countries and organizations involved in the Belt and Road Initiative. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank has provided US$1.7 billion of loans for 9 projects in Belt and Road participating countries. The Silk Road Fund has made US$4 billion of investment, and the 16+1 financial holding company between China and Central and Eastern European countries has been inaugurated. With distinctive focus, these new financial mechanisms and traditional multilateral financial institutions such as the World Bank complement each other. A multi-tiered Belt and Road financial cooperation network has taken an initial shape.
——这是民心相通不断促进的4年。“国之交在于民相亲，民相亲在于心相通。”“一带一路”建设参与国弘扬丝绸之路精神，开展智力丝绸之路、健康丝绸之路等建设，在科学、教育、文化、卫生、民间交往等各领域广泛开展合作，为“一带一路”建设夯实民意基础，筑牢社会根基。中国政府每年向相关国家提供1万个政府奖学金名额，地方政府也设立了丝绸之路专项奖学金，鼓励国际文教交流。各类丝绸之路文化年、旅游年、艺术节、影视桥、研讨会、智库对话等人文合作项目百花纷呈，人们往来频繁，在交流中拉近了心与心的距离。	
-- These four years have seen strengthened people-to-people connectivity. Friendship, which derives from close contact between the people, holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. Guided by the Silk Road spirit, we the Belt and Road Initiative participating countries have pulled our efforts to build the educational Silk Road and the health Silk Road, and carried out cooperation in science, education, culture, health and people-to-people exchange. Such cooperation has helped lay a solid popular and social foundation for pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative. Every year, the Chinese government provides 10,000 government scholarships to the relevant countries. China's local governments have also set up special Silk Road scholarships to encourage international cultural and educational exchanges. Projects of people-to-people cooperation such as Silk Road culture year, tourism year, art festival, film and TV project, seminar and think tank dialogue are flourishing. These interactions have brought our people increasingly closer.
丰硕的成果表明，“一带一路”倡议顺应时代潮流，适应发展规律，符合各国人民利益，具有广阔前景。	
These fruitful outcomes show that the Belt and Road Initiative responds to the trend of the times, conforms to the law of development, and meets the people's interests. It surely has broad prospects.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
中国人说，“万事开头难”。“一带一路”建设已经迈出坚实步伐。我们要乘势而上、顺势而为，推动“一带一路”建设行稳致远，迈向更加美好的未来。这里，我谈几点意见。	
As we often say in China, "The beginning is the most difficult part." A solid first step has been taken in pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative. We should build on the sound momentum generated to steer the Belt and Road Initiative toward greater success. In pursuing this endeavor, we should be guided by the following principles:
第一，我们要将“一带一路”建成和平之路。古丝绸之路，和时兴，战时衰。“一带一路”建设离不开和平安宁的环境。我们要构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，打造对话不对抗、结伴不结盟的伙伴关系。各国应该尊重彼此主权、尊严、领土完整，尊重彼此发展道路和社会制度，尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切。	
First, we should build the Belt and Road into a road for peace. The ancient silk routes thrived in times of peace, but lost vigor in times of war. The pursuit of the Belt and Road Initiative requires a peaceful and stable environment. We should foster a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation; and we should forge partnerships of dialogue with no confrontation and of friendship rather than alliance. All countries should respect each other's sovereignty, dignity and territorial integrity, each other's development paths and social systems, and each other's core interests and major concerns.
古丝绸之路沿线地区曾经是“流淌着牛奶与蜂蜜的地方”，如今很多地方却成了冲突动荡和危机挑战的代名词。这种状况不能再持续下去。我们要树立共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，营造共建共享的安全格局。要着力化解热点，坚持政治解决；要着力斡旋调解，坚持公道正义；要着力推进反恐，标本兼治，消除贫困落后和社会不公。	
Some regions along the ancient Silk Road used to be a land of milk and honey. Yet today, these places are often associated with conflict, turbulence, crisis and challenge. Such state of affairs should not be allowed to continue. We should foster the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and create a security environment built and shared by all. We should work to resolve hotspot issues through political means, and promote mediation in the spirit of justice. We should intensify counter-terrorism efforts, address both its symptoms and root causes, and strive to eradicate poverty, backwardness and social injustice.
第二，我们要将“一带一路”建成繁荣之路。发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。推进“一带一路”建设，要聚焦发展这个根本性问题，释放各国发展潜力，实现经济大融合、发展大联动、成果大共享。	
Second, we should build the Belt and Road into a road of prosperity. Development holds the master key to solving all problems. In pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, we should focus on the fundamental issue of development, release the growth potential of various countries and achieve economic integration and interconnected development and deliver benefits to all.
产业是经济之本。我们要深入开展产业合作，推动各国产业发展规划相互兼容、相互促进，抓好大项目建设，加强国际产能和装备制造合作，抓住新工业革命的发展新机遇，培育新业态，保持经济增长活力。	
Industries are the foundation of economy. We should deepen industrial cooperation so that industrial development plans of different countries will complement and reinforce each other. Focus should be put on launching major projects. We should strengthen international cooperation on production capacity and equipment manufacturing, and seize new development opportunities presented by the new industrial revolution to foster new businesses and maintain dynamic growth.
金融是现代经济的血液。血脉通，增长才有力。我们要建立稳定、可持续、风险可控的金融保障体系，创新投资和融资模式，推广政府和社会资本合作，建设多元化融资体系和多层次资本市场，发展普惠金融，完善金融服务网络。	
Finance is the lifeblood of modern economy. Only when the blood circulates smoothly can one grow. We should establish a stable and sustainable financial safeguard system that keeps risks under control, create new models of investment and financing, encourage greater cooperation between government and private capital and build a diversified financing system and a multi-tiered capital market. We should also develop inclusive finance and improve financial services networks.
设施联通是合作发展的基础。我们要着力推动陆上、海上、天上、网上四位一体的联通，聚焦关键通道、关键城市、关键项目，联结陆上公路、铁路道路网络和海上港口网络。我们已经确立“一带一路”建设六大经济走廊框架，要扎扎实实向前推进。要抓住新一轮能源结构调整和能源技术变革趋势，建设全球能源互联网，实现绿色低碳发展。要完善跨区域物流网建设。我们也要促进政策、规则、标准三位一体的联通，为互联互通提供机制保障。	
Infrastructure connectivity is the foundation of development through cooperation. We should promote land, maritime, air and cyberspace connectivity, concentrate our efforts on key passageways, cities and projects and connect networks of highways, railways and sea ports. The goal of building six major economic corridors under the Belt and Road Initiative has been set, and we should endeavor to meet it. We need to seize opportunities presented by the new round of change in energy mix and the revolution in energy technologies to develop global energy interconnection and achieve green and low-carbon development. We should improve trans-regional logistics network and promote connectivity of policies, rules and standards so as to provide institutional safeguards for enhancing connectivity.
第三，我们要将“一带一路”建成开放之路。开放带来进步，封闭导致落后。对一个国家而言，开放如同破茧成蝶，虽会经历一时阵痛，但将换来新生。“一带一路”建设要以开放为导向，解决经济增长和平衡问题。	
Third, we should build the Belt and Road into a road of opening up. Opening up brings progress while isolation results in backwardness. For a country, opening up is like the struggle of a chrysalis breaking free from its cacoon. There will be short-term pains, but such pains will create a new life. The Belt and Road Initiative should be an open one that will achieve both economic growth and balanced development.
我们要打造开放型合作平台，维护和发展开放型世界经济，共同创造有利于开放发展的环境，推动构建公正、合理、透明的国际经贸投资规则体系，促进生产要素有序流动、资源高效配置、市场深度融合。我们欢迎各国结合自身国情，积极发展开放型经济，参与全球治理和公共产品供给，携手构建广泛的利益共同体。	
We should build an open platform of cooperation and uphold and grow an open world economy. We should jointly create an environment that will facilitate opening up and development, establish a fair, equitable and transparent system of international trade and investment rules and boost the orderly flow of production factors, efficient resources allocation and full market integration. We welcome efforts made by other countries to grow open economies based on their national conditions, participate in global governance and provide public goods. Together, we can build a broad community of shared interests.
贸易是经济增长的重要引擎。我们要有“向外看”的胸怀，维护多边贸易体制，推动自由贸易区建设，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化。当然，我们也要着力解决发展失衡、治理困境、数字鸿沟、分配差距等问题，建设开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化。
Trade is an important engine driving growth. We should embrace the outside world with an open mind, uphold the multilateral trading regime, advance the building of free trade areas and promote liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment. Of course, we should also focus on resolving issues such as imbalances in development, difficulties in governance, digital divide and income disparity and make economic globalization open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
第四，我们要将“一带一路”建成创新之路。创新是推动发展的重要力量。“一带一路”建设本身就是一个创举，搞好“一带一路”建设也要向创新要动力。	
Fourth, we should build the Belt and Road into a road of innovation. Innovation is an important force powering development. The Belt and Road Initiative is new by nature and we need to encourage innovation in pursuing this initiative.
我们要坚持创新驱动发展，加强在数字经济、人工智能、纳米技术、量子计算机等前沿领域合作，推动大数据、云计算、智慧城市建设，连接成21世纪的数字丝绸之路。我们要促进科技同产业、科技同金融深度融合，优化创新环境，集聚创新资源。我们要为互联网时代的各国青年打造创业空间、创业工场，成就未来一代的青春梦想。	
We should pursue innovation-driven development and intensify cooperation in frontier areas such as digital economy, artificial intelligence, nanotechnology and quantum computing, and advance the development of big data, cloud computing and smart cities so as to turn them into a digital silk road of the 21st century. We should spur the full integration of science and technology into industries and finance, improve the environment for innovation and pool resources for innovation. We should create space and build workshops for young people of various countries to cultivate entrepreneurship in this age of the internet and help realize their dreams.
我们要践行绿色发展的新理念，倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的生产生活方式，加强生态环保合作，建设生态文明，共同实现2030年可持续发展目标。	
We should pursue the new vision of green development and a way of life and work that is green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable. Efforts should be made to strengthen cooperation in ecological and environmental protection and build a sound ecosystem so as to realize the goals set by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
第五，我们要将“一带一路”建成文明之路。“一带一路”建设要以文明交流超越文明隔阂、文明互鉴超越文明冲突、文明共存超越文明优越，推动各国相互理解、相互尊重、相互信任。	
Fifth, we should build the Belt and Road into a road connecting different civilizations. In pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, we should ensure that when it comes to different civilizations, exchange will replace estrangement, mutual learning will replace clashes, and coexistence will replace a sense of superiority. This will boost mutual understanding, mutual respect and mutual trust among different countries.
我们要建立多层次人文合作机制，搭建更多合作平台，开辟更多合作渠道。要推动教育合作，扩大互派留学生规模，提升合作办学水平。要发挥智库作用，建设好智库联盟和合作网络。在文化、体育、卫生领域，要创新合作模式，推动务实项目。要用好历史文化遗产，联合打造具有丝绸之路特色的旅游产品和遗产保护。我们要加强各国议会、政党、民间组织往来，密切妇女、青年、残疾人等群体交流，促进包容发展。我们也要加强国际反腐合作，让“一带一路”成为廉洁之路。	
We should establish a multi-tiered mechanism for cultural and people-to-people exchanges, build more cooperation platforms and open more cooperation channels. Educational cooperation should be boosted, more exchange students should be encouraged and the performance of cooperatively run schools should be enhanced. Think tanks should play a better role and efforts should be made to establish think tank networks and partnerships. In the cultural, sports and health sectors, new cooperation models should be created to facilitate projects with concrete benefits. Historical and cultural heritage should be fully tapped to jointly develop tourist products and protect heritage in ways that preserve the distinctive features of the Silk Road. We should strengthen exchanges between parliaments, political parties and non-governmental organizations of different countries as well as between women, youths and people with disabilities with a view to achieving inclusive development. We should also strengthen international counter-corruption cooperation so that the Belt and Road will be a road with high ethical standards.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
当前，中国发展正站在新的起点上。我们将深入贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，不断适应、把握、引领经济发展新常态，积极推进供给侧结构性改革，实现持续发展，为“一带一路”注入强大动力，为世界发展带来新的机遇。	
China has reached a new starting point in its development endeavors. Guided by the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development, we will adapt to and steer the new normal of economic development and seize opportunities it presents. We will actively promote supply-side structural reform to achieve sustainable development, inject strong impetus into the Belt and Road Initiative and create new opportunities for global development.
——中国愿在和平共处五项原则基础上，发展同所有“一带一路”建设参与国的友好合作。中国愿同世界各国分享发展经验，但不会干涉他国内政，不会输出社会制度和发展模式，更不会强加于人。我们推进“一带一路”建设不会重复地缘博弈的老套路，而将开创合作共赢的新模式；不会形成破坏稳定的小集团，而将建设和谐共存的大家庭。	
-- China will enhance friendship and cooperation with all countries involved in the Belt and Road Initiative on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence. We are ready to share practices of development with other countries, but we have no intention to interfere in other countries' internal affairs, export our own social system and model of development, or impose our own will on others. In pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, we will not resort to outdated geopolitical maneuvering. What we hope to achieve is a new model of win-win cooperation. We have no intention to form a small group detrimental to stability, what we hope to create is a big family of harmonious co-existence.
——中国已经同很多国家达成了“一带一路”务实合作协议，其中既包括交通运输、基础设施、能源等硬件联通项目，也包括通信、海关、检验检疫等软件联通项目，还包括经贸、产业、电子商务、海洋和绿色经济等多领域的合作规划和具体项目。中国同有关国家的铁路部门将签署深化中欧班列合作协议。我们将推动这些合作项目早日启动、早见成效。	
-- China has reached practical cooperation agreements with many countries on pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative. These agreements cover not only projects of hardware connectivity, like transport, infrastructure and energy, but also software connectivity, involving telecommunications, customs and quarantine inspection. The agreements also include plans and projects for cooperation in economy and trade, industry, e-commerce, marine and green economy. The Chinese railway authorities will sign agreements with their counterparts of related countries to deepen cooperation on China-Europe regular railway cargo service. We will work to launch these cooperation projects at an early date and see that they deliver early benefits.
——中国将加大对“一带一路”建设资金支持，向丝路基金新增资金1000亿元人民币，鼓励金融机构开展人民币海外基金业务，规模预计约3000亿元人民币。中国国家开发银行、进出口银行将分别提供2500亿元和1300亿元等值人民币专项贷款，用于支持“一带一路”基础设施建设、产能、金融合作。我们还将同亚洲基础设施投资银行、金砖国家新开发银行、世界银行及其他多边开发机构合作支持“一带一路”项目，同有关各方共同制定“一带一路”融资指导原则。	
-- China will scale up financing support for the Belt and Road Initiative by contributing an additional RMB 100 billion to the Silk Road Fund, and we encourage financial institutions to conduct overseas RMB fund business with an estimated amount of about RMB 300 billion. The China Development Bank and the Export-Import Bank of China will set up special lending schemes respectively worth RMB 250 billion equivalent and RMB 130 billion equivalent to support Belt and Road cooperation on infrastructure, industrial capacity and financing. We will also work with the AIIB, the BRICS New Development Bank, the World Bank and other multilateral development institutions to support Belt and Road related projects. We will work with other parties concerned to jointly formulate guidelines for financing the Belt and Road related development projects.
——中国将积极同“一带一路”建设参与国发展互利共赢的经贸伙伴关系，促进同各相关国家贸易和投资便利化，建设“一带一路”自由贸易网络，助力地区和世界经济增长。本届论坛期间，中国将同30多个国家签署经贸合作协议，同有关国家协商自由贸易协定。中国将从2018年起举办中国国际进口博览会。	
-- China will endeavor to build a win-win business partnership with other countries participating in the Belt and Road Initiative, enhance trade and investment facilitation with them, and build a Belt and Road free trade network. These efforts are designed to promote growth both in our respective regions and globally. During this forum, China will sign business and trade cooperation agreements with over 30 countries and enter into consultation on free trade agreements with related countries. China will host the China International Import Expo starting from 2018.
——中国愿同各国加强创新合作，启动“一带一路”科技创新行动计划，开展科技人文交流、共建联合实验室、科技园区合作、技术转移4项行动。我们将在未来5年内安排2500人次青年科学家来华从事短期科研工作，培训5000人次科学技术和管理人员，投入运行50家联合实验室。我们将设立生态环保大数据服务平台，倡议建立“一带一路”绿色发展国际联盟，并为相关国家应对气候变化提供援助。	
-- China will enhance cooperation on innovation with other countries. We will launch the Belt and Road Science, Technology and Innovation Cooperation Action Plan, which consists of the Science and Technology People-to-People Exchange Initiative, the Joint Laboratory Initiative, the Science Park Cooperation Initiative and the Technology Transfer Initiative. In the coming five years, we will offer 2,500 short-term research visits to China for young foreign scientists, train 5,000 foreign scientists, engineers and managers, and set up 50 joint laboratories. We will set up a big data service platform on ecological and environmental protection. We propose the establishment of an international coalition for green development on the Belt and Road, and we will provide support to related countries in adapting to climate change.
——中国将在未来3年向参与“一带一路”建设的发展中国家和国际组织提供600亿元人民币援助，建设更多民生项目。我们将向“一带一路”沿线发展中国家提供20亿元人民币紧急粮食援助，向南南合作援助基金增资10亿美元，在沿线国家实施100个“幸福家园”、100个“爱心助困”、100个“康复助医”等项目。我们将向有关国际组织提供10亿美元落实一批惠及沿线国家的合作项目。	
-- In the coming three years, China will provide assistance worth RMB 60 billion to developing countries and international organizations participating in the Belt and Road Initiative to launch more projects to improve people's well-being. We will provide emergency food aid worth RMB 2 billion to developing countries along the Belt and Road and make an additional contribution of US$1 billion to the Assistance Fund for South-South Cooperation. China will launch 100 "happy home" projects, 100 poverty alleviation projects and 100 health care and rehabilitation projects in countries along the Belt and Road. China will provide relevant international organizations with US$1 billion to implement cooperation projects that will benefit the countries along the Belt and Road.
——中国将设立“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛后续联络机制，成立“一带一路”财经发展研究中心、“一带一路”建设促进中心，同多边开发银行共同设立多边开发融资合作中心，同国际货币基金组织合作建立能力建设中心。我们将建设丝绸之路沿线民间组织合作网络，打造新闻合作联盟、音乐教育联盟以及其他人文合作新平台。	
-- China will put in place the following mechanisms to boost Belt and Road cooperation: a liaison office for the Forum's follow-up activities, the Research Center for the Belt and Road Financial and Economic Development, the Facilitating Center for Building the Belt and Road, the Multilateral Development Financial Cooperation Center in cooperation with multilateral development banks, and an IMF-China Capacity Building Center. We will also develop a network for cooperation among the NGOs in countries along the Belt and Road as well as new people-to-people exchange platforms such as a Belt and Road news alliance and a music education alliance.
“一带一路”建设植根于丝绸之路的历史土壤，重点面向亚欧非大陆，同时向所有朋友开放。不论来自亚洲、欧洲，还是非洲、美洲，都是“一带一路”建设国际合作的伙伴。“一带一路”建设将由大家共同商量，“一带一路”建设成果将由大家共同分享。	
The Belt and Road Initiative is rooted in the ancient Silk Road. It focuses on the Asian, European and African continents, but is also open to all other countries. All countries, from either Asia, Europe, Africa or the Americas, can be international cooperation partners of the Belt and Road Initiative. The pursuit of this initiative is based on extensive consultation and its benefits will be shared by us all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
中国古语讲：“不积跬步，无以至千里。”阿拉伯谚语说，“金字塔是一块块石头垒成的”。欧洲也有句话：“伟业非一日之功”。“一带一路”建设是伟大的事业，需要伟大的实践。让我们一步一个脚印推进实施，一点一滴抓出成果，造福世界，造福人民！	
An ancient Chinese saying goes, "A long journey can be covered only by taking one step at a time". Similarly, there is an Arab proverb which says that the Pyramid was built by piling one stone on another. In Europe, there is also the saying that "Rome wasn't built in a day." The Belt and Road Initiative is a great undertaking which requires dedicated efforts. Let us pursue this initiative step by step and deliver outcome one by one. By doing so, we will bring true benefit to both the world and all our people!
祝本次高峰论坛圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation a full success!
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!
71. 习近平在世界经济论坛2017年年会开幕式上的主旨演讲
共担时代责任 共促全球发展
——在世界经济论坛2017年年会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2017年1月17日，达沃斯）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Jointly Shoulder Responsibility of Our Times, Promote Global Growth
-- Keynote Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping At the Opening Session Of the World Economic Forum Annual Meeting 2017
Davos, 17 January 2017
尊敬的洛伊特哈德主席和豪森先生，
尊敬的各国元首、政府首脑、副元首和夫人，
尊敬的国际组织负责人，
尊敬的施瓦布主席和夫人，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
President Doris Leuthard and Mr. Roland Hausin,
Heads of State and Government, Deputy Heads of State and Your Spouses,
Heads of International Organizations,
Dr. Klaus Schwab and Mrs. Hilde Schwab,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
很高兴来到美丽的达沃斯。达沃斯虽然只是阿尔卑斯山上的一个小镇，却是一个观察世界经济的重要窗口。大家从四面八方会聚这里，各种思想碰撞出智慧的火花，以较少的投入获得了很高的产出。我看这个现象可以称作“施瓦布经济学”。	
I'm delighted to come to beautiful Davos. Though just a small town in the Alps, Davos is an important window for taking the pulse of the global economy. People from around the world come here to exchange ideas and insights, which broaden their vision. This makes the WEF annual meeting a cost-effective brainstorming event, which I would call "Schwab economics".
“这是最好的时代，也是最坏的时代”，英国文学家狄更斯曾这样描述工业革命发生后的世界。今天，我们也生活在一个矛盾的世界之中。一方面，物质财富不断积累，科技进步日新月异，人类文明发展到历史最高水平。另一方面，地区冲突频繁发生，恐怖主义、难民潮等全球性挑战此起彼伏，贫困、失业、收入差距拉大，世界面临的不确定性上升。	
"It was the best of times, it was the worst of times." These are the words used by the English writer Charles Dickens to describe the world after the Industrial Revolution. Today, we also live in a world of contradictions. On the one hand, with growing material wealth and advances in science and technology, human civilization has developed as never before. On the other hand, frequent regional conflicts, global challenges like terrorism and refugees, as well as poverty, unemployment and widening income gap have all added to the uncertainties of the world.
对此，许多人感到困惑，世界到底怎么了？	
Many people feel bewildered and wonder: What has gone wrong with the world?
要解决这个困惑，首先要找准问题的根源。有一种观点把世界乱象归咎于经济全球化。经济全球化曾经被人们视为阿里巴巴的山洞，现在又被不少人看作潘多拉的盒子。国际社会围绕经济全球化问题展开了广泛讨论。	
To answer this question, one must first track the source of the problem. Some blame economic globalization for the chaos in the world. Economic globalization was once viewed as the treasure cave found by Ali Baba in The Arabian Nights, but it has now become the Pandora's box in the eyes of many. The international community finds itself in a heated debate on economic globalization.
今天，我想从经济全球化问题切入，谈谈我对世界经济的看法。	
Today, I wish to address the global economy in the context of economic globalization.
我想说的是，困扰世界的很多问题，并不是经济全球化造成的。比如，过去几年来，源自中东、北非的难民潮牵动全球，数以百万计的民众颠沛流离，甚至不少年幼的孩子在路途中葬身大海，让我们痛心疾首。导致这一问题的原因，是战乱、冲突、地区动荡。解决这一问题的出路，是谋求和平、推动和解、恢复稳定。再比如，国际金融危机也不是经济全球化发展的必然产物，而是金融资本过度逐利、金融监管严重缺失的结果。把困扰世界的问题简单归咎于经济全球化，既不符合事实，也无助于问题解决。	
The point I want to make is that many of the problems troubling the world are not caused by economic globalization. For instance, the refugee waves from the Middle East and North Africa in recent years have become a global concern. Several million people have been displaced, and some small children lost their lives while crossing the rough sea. This is indeed heartbreaking. It is war, conflict and regional turbulence that have created this problem, and its solution lies in making peace, promoting reconciliation and restoring stability. The international financial crisis is another example. It is not an inevitable outcome of economic globalization; rather, it is the consequence of excessive chase of profit by financial capital and grave failure of financial regulation. Just blaming economic globalization for the world's problems is inconsistent with reality, and it will not help solve the problems.
历史地看，经济全球化是社会生产力发展的客观要求和科技进步的必然结果，不是哪些人、哪些国家人为造出来的。经济全球化为世界经济增长提供了强劲动力，促进了商品和资本流动、科技和文明进步、各国人民交往。	
From the historical perspective, economic globalization resulted from growing social productivity, and is a natural outcome of scientific and technological progress, not something created by any individuals or any countries. Economic globalization has powered global growth and facilitated movement of goods and capital, advances in science, technology and civilization, and interactions among peoples.
当然，我们也要承认，经济全球化是一把“双刃剑”。当世界经济处于下行期的时候，全球经济“蛋糕”不容易做大，甚至变小了，增长和分配、资本和劳动、效率和公平的矛盾就会更加突出，发达国家和发展中国家都会感受到压力和冲击。反全球化的呼声，反映了经济全球化进程的不足，值得我们重视和深思。	
But we should also recognize that economic globalization is a double-edged sword. When the global economy is under downward pressure, it is hard to make the cake of global economy bigger. It may even shrink, which will strain the relations between growth and distribution, between capital and labor, and between efficiency and equity. Both developed and developing countries have felt the punch. Voices against globalization have laid bare pitfalls in the process of economic globalization that we need to take seriously.
“甘瓜抱苦蒂，美枣生荆棘。”从哲学上说，世界上没有十全十美的事物，因为事物存在优点就把它看得完美无缺是不全面的，因为事物存在缺点就把它看得一无是处也是不全面的。经济全球化确实带来了新问题，但我们不能就此把经济全球化一棍子打死，而是要适应和引导好经济全球化，消解经济全球化的负面影响，让它更好惠及每个国家、每个民族。	
As a line in an old Chinese poem goes, "Honey melons hang on bitter vines; sweet dates grow on thistles and thorns." In a philosophical sense, nothing is perfect in the world. One would fail to see the full picture if he claims something is perfect because of its merits, or if he views something as useless just because of its defects. It is true that economic globalization has created new problems, but this is no justification to write economic globalization off completely. Rather, we should adapt to and guide economic globalization, cushion its negative impact, and deliver its benefits to all countries and all nations.
当年，中国对经济全球化也有过疑虑，对加入世界贸易组织也有过忐忑。但是，我们认为，融入世界经济是历史大方向，中国经济要发展，就要敢于到世界市场的汪洋大海中去游泳，如果永远不敢到大海中去经风雨、见世面，总有一天会在大海中溺水而亡。所以，中国勇敢迈向了世界市场。在这个过程中，我们呛过水，遇到过漩涡，遇到过风浪，但我们在游泳中学会了游泳。这是正确的战略抉择。	
There was a time when China also had doubts about economic globalization, and was not sure whether it should join the World Trade Organization. But we came to the conclusion that integration into the global economy is a historical trend. To grow its economy, China must have the courage to swim in the vast ocean of the global market. If one is always afraid of bracing the storm and exploring the new world, he will sooner or later get drowned in the ocean. Therefore, China took a brave step to embrace the global market. We have had our fair share of choking in the water and encountered whirlpools and choppy waves, but we have learned how to swim in this process. It has proved to be a right strategic choice.
世界经济的大海，你要还是不要，都在那儿，是回避不了的。想人为切断各国经济的资金流、技术流、产品流、产业流、人员流，让世界经济的大海退回到一个一个孤立的小湖泊、小河流，是不可能的，也是不符合历史潮流的。	
Whether you like it or not, the global economy is the big ocean that you cannot escape from. Any attempt to cut off the flow of capital, technologies, products, industries and people between economies, and channel the waters in the ocean back into isolated lakes and creeks is simply not possible. Indeed, it runs counter to the historical trend.
人类历史告诉我们，有问题不可怕，可怕的是不敢直面问题，找不到解决问题的思路。面对经济全球化带来的机遇和挑战，正确的选择是，充分利用一切机遇，合作应对一切挑战，引导好经济全球化走向。	
The history of mankind tells us that problems are not to be feared. What should concern us is refusing to face up to problems and not knowing what to do about them. In the face of both opportunities and challenges of economic globalization, the right thing to do is to seize every opportunity, jointly meet challenges and chart the right course for economic globalization.
去年年底，我在亚太经合组织领导人非正式会议上提出，要让经济全球化进程更有活力、更加包容、更可持续。我们要主动作为、适度管理，让经济全球化的正面效应更多释放出来，实现经济全球化进程再平衡；我们要顺应大势、结合国情，正确选择融入经济全球化的路径和节奏；我们要讲求效率、注重公平，让不同国家、不同阶层、不同人群共享经济全球化的好处。这是我们这个时代的领导者应有的担当，更是各国人民对我们的期待。
At the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in late 2016, I spoke about the necessity to make the process of economic globalization more invigorated, more inclusive and more sustainable. We should act pro-actively and manage economic globalization as appropriate so as to release its positive impact and rebalance the process of economic globalization. We should follow the general trend, proceed from our respective national conditions and embark on the right pathway of integrating into economic globalization with the right pace. We should strike a balance between efficiency and equity to ensure that different countries, different social strata and different groups of people all share in the benefits of economic globalization. The people of all countries expect nothing less from us, and this is our unshirkable responsibility as leaders of our times.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
当前，最迫切的任务是引领世界经济走出困境。世界经济长期低迷，贫富差距、南北差距问题更加突出。究其根源，是经济领域三大突出矛盾没有得到有效解决。	
At present, the most pressing task before us is to steer the global economy out of difficulty. The global economy has remained sluggish for quite some time. The gap between the poor and the rich and between the South and the North is widening. The root cause is that the three critical issues in the economic sphere have not been effectively addressed.
一是全球增长动能不足，难以支撑世界经济持续稳定增长。世界经济增速处于7年来最低水平，全球贸易增速继续低于经济增速。短期性政策刺激效果不佳，深层次结构性改革尚在推进。世界经济正处在动能转换的换挡期，传统增长引擎对经济的拉动作用减弱，人工智能、3D打印等新技术虽然不断涌现，但新的经济增长点尚未形成。世界经济仍然未能开辟出一条新路。	
First, lack of robust driving forces for global growth makes it difficult to sustain the steady growth of the global economy. The growth of the global economy is now at its slowest pace in seven years. Growth of global trade has been slower than global GDP growth. Short-term policy stimuli are ineffective. Fundamental structural reform is just unfolding. The global economy is now in a period of moving toward new growth drivers, and the role of traditional engines to drive growth has weakened. Despite the emergence of new technologies such as artificial intelligence and 3D printing, new sources of growth are yet to emerge. A new path for the global economy remains elusive.
二是全球经济治理滞后，难以适应世界经济新变化。前不久，拉加德女士告诉我，新兴市场国家和发展中国家对全球经济增长的贡献率已经达到80%。过去数十年，国际经济力量对比深刻演变，而全球治理体系未能反映新格局，代表性和包容性很不够。全球产业布局在不断调整，新的产业链、价值链、供应链日益形成，而贸易和投资规则未能跟上新形势，机制封闭化、规则碎片化十分突出。全球金融市场需要增强抗风险能力，而全球金融治理机制未能适应新需求，难以有效化解国际金融市场频繁动荡、资产泡沫积聚等问题。
Second, inadequate global economic governance makes it difficult to adapt to new developments in the global economy. Madame Christine Lagarde recently told me that emerging markets and developing countries already contribute to 80% of the growth of the global economy. The global economic landscape has changed profoundly in the past few decades. However, the global governance system has not embraced those new changes and is therefore inadequate in terms of representation and inclusiveness. The global industrial landscape is changing and new industrial chains, value chains and supply chains are taking shape. However, trade and investment rules have not kept pace with these developments, resulting in acute problems such as closed mechanisms and fragmentation of rules. The global financial market needs to be more resilient against risks, but the global financial governance mechanism fails to meet the new requirement and is thus unable to effectively resolve problems such as frequent international financial market volatility and the build-up of asset bubbles.
三是全球发展失衡，难以满足人们对美好生活的期待。施瓦布先生在《第四次工业革命》一书中写道，第四次工业革命将产生极其广泛而深远的影响，包括会加剧不平等，特别是有可能扩大资本回报和劳动力回报的差距。全球最富有的1%人口拥有的财富量超过其余99%人口财富的总和，收入分配不平等、发展空间不平衡令人担忧。全球仍然有7亿多人口生活在极端贫困之中。对很多家庭而言，拥有温暖住房、充足食物、稳定工作还是一种奢望。这是当今世界面临的最大挑战，也是一些国家社会动荡的重要原因。	
Third, uneven global development makes it difficult to meet people's expectations for better lives. Dr. Schwab has observed in his book The Fourth Industrial Revolution that this round of industrial revolution will produce extensive and far-reaching impacts such as growing inequality, particularly the possible widening gap between return on capital and return on labor. The richest one percent of the world's population own more wealth than the remaining 99 percent. Inequality in income distribution and uneven development space are worrying. Over 700 million people in the world are still living in extreme poverty. For many families, to have warm houses, enough food and secure jobs is still a distant dream. This is the biggest challenge facing the world today. It is also what is behind the social turmoil in some countries.
这些问题反映出，当今世界经济增长、治理、发展模式存在必须解决的问题。国际红十字会创始人杜楠说过：“真正的敌人不是我们的邻国，而是饥饿、贫穷、无知、迷信和偏见。”我们既要有分析问题的智慧，更要有采取行动的勇气。	
All this shows that there are indeed problems with world economic growth, governance and development models, and they must be resolved. The founder of the Red Cross Henry Dunant once said, "Our real enemy is not the neighboring country; it is hunger, poverty, ignorance, superstition and prejudice." We need to have the vision to dissect these problems; more importantly, we need to have the courage to take actions to address them.
第一，坚持创新驱动，打造富有活力的增长模式。世界经济面临的根本问题是增长动力不足。创新是引领发展的第一动力。与以往历次工业革命相比，第四次工业革命是以指数级而非线性速度展开。我们必须在创新中寻找出路。只有敢于创新、勇于变革，才能突破世界经济增长和发展的瓶颈。	
First, we should develop a dynamic, innovation-driven growth model. The fundamental issue plaguing the global economy is the lack of driving force for growth. Innovation is the primary force guiding development. Unlike the previous industrial revolutions, the fourth industrial revolution is unfolding at an exponential rather than linear pace. We need to relentlessly pursue innovation. Only with the courage to innovate and reform can we remove bottlenecks blocking global growth and development.
二十国集团领导人在杭州峰会上达成重要共识，要以创新为重要抓手，挖掘各国和世界经济增长新动力。我们要创新发展理念，超越财政刺激多一点还是货币宽松多一点的争论，树立标本兼治、综合施策的思路。我们要创新政策手段，推进结构性改革，为增长创造空间、增加后劲。我们要创新增长方式，把握好新一轮产业革命、数字经济等带来的机遇，既应对好气候变化、人口老龄化等带来的挑战，也化解掉信息化、自动化等给就业带来的冲击，在培育新产业新业态新模式过程中注意创造新的就业机会，让各国人民重拾信心和希望。	
With this in mind, G20 leaders reached an important consensus at the Hangzhou Summit, which is to take innovation as a key driver and foster new driving force of growth for both individual countries and the global economy. We should develop a new development philosophy and rise above the debate about whether there should be more fiscal stimulus or more monetary easing. We should adopt a multipronged approach to address both the symptoms and the underlying problems. We should adopt new policy instruments and advance structural reform to create more space for growth and sustain its momentum. We should develop new growth models and seize opportunities presented by the new round of industrial revolution and digital economy. We should meet the challenges of climate change and aging population. We should address the negative impact of IT application and automation on jobs. When cultivating new industries and new forms models of business models, we should create new jobs and restore confidence and hope to our peoples.
第二，坚持协同联动，打造开放共赢的合作模式。人类已经成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体，利益高度融合，彼此相互依存。每个国家都有发展权利，同时都应该在更加广阔的层面考虑自身利益，不能以损害其他国家利益为代价。	
Second, we should pursue a well-coordinated and inter-connected approach to develop a model of open and win-win cooperation. Today, mankind has become a close-knit community of shared future. Countries have extensive converging interests and are mutually dependent. All countries enjoy the right to development. At the same time, they should view their own interests in a broader context and refrain from pursuing them at the expense of others.
我们要坚定不移发展开放型世界经济，在开放中分享机会和利益、实现互利共赢。不能一遇到风浪就退回到港湾中去，那是永远不能到达彼岸的。我们要下大气力发展全球互联互通，让世界各国实现联动增长，走向共同繁荣。我们要坚定不移发展全球自由贸易和投资，在开放中推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义。搞保护主义如同把自己关进黑屋子，看似躲过了风吹雨打，但也隔绝了阳光和空气。打贸易战的结果只能是两败俱伤。	
We should commit ourselves to growing an open global economy to share opportunities and interests through opening-up and achieve win-win outcomes. One should not just retreat to the harbor when encountering a storm, for this will never get us to the other shore of the ocean. We must redouble efforts to develop global connectivity to enable all countries to achieve inter-connected growth and share prosperity. We must remain committed to developing global free trade and investment, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation through opening-up and say no to protectionism. Pursuing protectionism is like locking oneself in a dark room. While wind and rain may be kept outside, that dark room will also block light and air. No one will emerge as a winner in a trade war.
第三，坚持与时俱进，打造公正合理的治理模式。小智治事，大智治制。全球经济治理体系变革紧迫性越来越突出，国际社会呼声越来越高。全球治理体系只有适应国际经济格局新要求，才能为全球经济提供有力保障。	
Third, we should develop a model of fair and equitable governance in keeping with the trend of the times. As the Chinese saying goes, people with petty shrewdness attend to trivial matters, while people with vision attend to governance of institutions. There is a growing call from the international community for reforming the global economic governance system, which is a pressing task for us. Only when it adapts to new dynamics in the international economic architecture can the global governance system sustain global growth.
国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会平等成员，理应平等参与决策、享受权利、履行义务。要赋予新兴市场国家和发展中国家更多代表性和发言权。2010年国际货币基金组织份额改革方案已经生效，这一势头应该保持下去。要坚持多边主义，维护多边体制权威性和有效性。要践行承诺、遵守规则，不能按照自己的意愿取舍或选择。《巴黎协定》符合全球发展大方向，成果来之不易，应该共同坚守，不能轻言放弃。这是我们对子孙后代必须担负的责任！	
Countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are all equal members of the international community. As such, they are entitled to participate in decision-making, enjoy rights and fulfill obligations on an equal basis. Emerging markets and developing countries deserve greater representation and voice. The 2010 IMF quota reform has entered into force, and its momentum should be sustained. We should adhere to multilateralism to uphold the authority and efficacy of multilateral institutions. We should honor promises and abide by rules. One should not select or bend rules as he sees fit. The Paris Agreement is a hard-won achievement which is in keeping with the underlying trend of global development. All signatories should stick to it instead of walking away from it as this is a responsibility we must assume for future generations.
第四，坚持公平包容，打造平衡普惠的发展模式。“大道之行也，天下为公。”发展的目的是造福人民。要让发展更加平衡，让发展机会更加均等、发展成果人人共享，就要完善发展理念和模式，提升发展公平性、有效性、协同性。	
Fourth, we should develop a balanced, equitable and inclusive development model. As the Chinese saying goes, "A just cause should be pursued for common good." Development is ultimately for the people. To achieve more balanced development and ensure that the people have equal access to opportunities and share in the benefits of development, it is crucial to have a sound development philosophy and model and make development equitable, effective and balanced.
我们要倡导勤劳俭朴、努力奋进的社会风气，让所有人的劳动成果得到尊重。要着力解决贫困、失业、收入差距拉大等问题，照顾好弱势人群的关切，促进社会公平正义。要保护好生态环境，推动经济、社会、环境协调发展，实现人与自然、人与社会和谐。要落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程，实现全球范围平衡发展。	
We should foster a culture that values diligence, frugality and enterprise and respects the fruits of hard work of all. Priority should be given to addressing poverty, unemployment, the widening income gap and the concerns of the disadvantaged to promote social equity and justice. It is important to protect the environment while pursuing economic and social progress so as to achieve harmony between man and nature and between man and society. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development should be implemented to realize balanced development across the world.
“积力之所举，则无不胜也；众智之所为，则无不成也。”只要我们牢固树立人类命运共同体意识，携手努力、共同担当，同舟共济、共渡难关，就一定能够让世界更美好、让人民更幸福。	
A Chinese adage reads, "Victory is ensured when people pool their strength; success is secured when people put their heads together." As long as we keep to the goal of building a community of shared future for mankind and work hand in hand to fulfill our responsibilities and overcome difficulties, we will be able to create a better world and deliver better lives for our peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
经过38年改革开放，中国已经成为世界第二大经济体。道路决定命运。中国的发展，关键在于中国人民在中国共产党领导下，走出了一条适合中国国情的发展道路。	
China has become the world's second largest economy thanks to 38 years of reform and opening-up. A right path leads to a bright future. China has come this far because the Chinese people have, under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, blazed a development path that suits China's actual conditions.
这是一条从本国国情出发确立的道路。中国立足自身国情和实践，从中华文明中汲取智慧，博采东西方各家之长，坚守但不僵化，借鉴但不照搬，在不断探索中形成了自己的发展道路。条条大路通罗马。谁都不应该把自己的发展道路定为一尊，更不应该把自己的发展道路强加于人。	
This is a path based on China's realities. China has in the past years succeeded in embarking on a development path that suits itself by drawing on both the wisdom of its civilization and the practices of other countries in both East and West. In exploring this path, China refuses to stay insensitive to the changing times or to blindly follow in others' footsteps. All roads lead to Rome. No country should view its own development path as the only viable one, still less should it impose its own development path on others.
这是一条把人民利益放在首位的道路。中国秉持以人民为中心的发展思想，把改善人民生活、增进人民福祉作为出发点和落脚点，在人民中寻找发展动力、依靠人民推动发展、使发展造福人民。中国坚持共同富裕的目标，大力推进减贫事业，让7亿多人口摆脱贫困，正在向着全面建成小康社会目标快步前进。	
This is a path that puts people's interests first. China follows a people-oriented development philosophy and is committed to bettering the lives of its people. Development is of the people, by the people and for the people. China pursues the goal of common prosperity. We have taken major steps to alleviate poverty and lifted over 700 million people out of poverty, and good progress is being made in our efforts to finish building a society of initial prosperity in all respects.
这是一条改革创新的道路。中国坚持通过改革破解前进中遇到的困难和挑战，敢于啃硬骨头、涉险滩，勇于破除妨碍发展的体制机制障碍，不断解放和发展社会生产力，不断解放和增强社会活力。近4年来，我们在之前30多年不断改革的基础上，又推出了1200多项改革举措，为中国发展注入了强大动力。	
This is a path of pursuing reform and innovation. China has tackled difficulties and met challenges on its way forward through reform. China has demonstrated its courage to take on difficult issues, navigate treacherous rapids and remove institutional hurdles standing in the way of development. These efforts have enabled us to unleash productivity and social vitality. Building on progress of 30-odd years of reform, we have introduced more than 1,200 reform measures over the past four years, injecting powerful impetus into China's development.
这是一条在开放中谋求共同发展的道路。中国坚持对外开放基本国策，奉行互利共赢的开放战略，不断提升发展的内外联动性，在实现自身发展的同时更多惠及其他国家和人民。
This is a path of pursuing common development through opening-up. China is committed to a fundamental policy of opening-up and pursues a win-win opening-up strategy. China's development is both domestic and external oriented; while developing itself, China also shares more of its development outcomes with other countries and peoples.
中国发展取得了巨大成就，中国人民生活得到了极大改善，这对中国好，对世界也好。中国的发展成就，是中国人民几十年含辛茹苦、流血流汗干出来的。千百年来，中华民族素以吃苦耐劳闻名于世。中国人民深知，世界上没有免费的午餐，中国是一个有着13亿多人口的大国，想发展就要靠自己苦干实干，不能寄托于别人的恩赐，世界上也没有谁有这样的能力。观察中国发展，要看中国人民得到了什么收获，更要看中国人民付出了什么辛劳；要看中国取得了什么成就，更要看中国为世界作出了什么贡献。这才是全面的看法。
China's outstanding development achievements and the vastly improved living standards of the Chinese people are a blessing to both China and the world. Such achievements in development over the past decades owe themselves to the hard work and perseverance of the Chinese people, a quality that has defined the Chinese nation for several thousand years. We Chinese know only too well that there is no such thing as a free lunch in the world. For a big country with over 1.3 billion people, development can be achieved only with the dedication and tireless efforts of its own people. We cannot expect others to deliver development to China, and no one is in a position to do so. When assessing China's development, one should not only see what benefits the Chinese people have gained, but also how much hard effort they have put in, not just what achievements China has made, but also what contribution China has made to the world. Then one will reach a balanced conclusion about China's development.
1950年至2016年，中国在自身长期发展水平和人民生活水平不高的情况下，累计对外提供援款4000多亿元人民币，实施各类援外项目5000多个，其中成套项目近3000个，举办11000多期培训班，为发展中国家在华培训各类人员26万多名。改革开放以来，中国累计吸引外资超过1.7万亿美元，累计对外直接投资超过1.2万亿美元，为世界经济发展作出了巨大贡献。国际金融危机爆发以来，中国经济增长对世界经济增长的贡献率年均在30%以上。这些数字，在世界上都是名列前茅的。	
Between 1950 and 2016, despite its modest level of development and living standard, China provided more than 400 billion yuan of foreign assistance, undertook over 5,000 foreign assistance projects, including nearly 3,000 complete projects, and held over 11,000 training workshops in China for over 260,000 personnel from other developing countries. Since it launched reform and opening-up, China has attracted over 1.7 trillion US dollars of foreign investment and made over 1.2 trillion US dollars of direct outbound investment, making huge contribution to global economic development. In the years following the outbreak of the international financial crisis, China contributed to over 30% of global growth every year on average. All these figures are among the highest in the world.
从这些数字可以看出，中国的发展是世界的机遇，中国是经济全球化的受益者，更是贡献者。中国经济快速增长，为全球经济稳定和增长提供了持续强大的推动。中国同一大批国家的联动发展，使全球经济发展更加平衡。中国减贫事业的巨大成就，使全球经济增长更加包容。中国改革开放持续推进，为开放型世界经济发展提供了重要动力。	
The figures speak for themselves. China's development is an opportunity for the world; China has not only benefited from economic globalization but also contributed to it. Rapid growth in China has been a sustained, powerful engine for global economic stability and expansion. The inter-connected development of China and a large number of other countries has made the world economy more balanced. China's remarkable achievement in poverty reduction has contributed to more inclusive global growth. And China's continuous progress in reform and opening-up has lent much momentum to an open world economy.
中国人民深知实现国家繁荣富强的艰辛，对各国人民取得的发展成就都点赞，都为他们祝福，都希望他们的日子越过越好，不会犯“红眼病”，不会抱怨他人从中国发展中得到了巨大机遇和丰厚回报。中国人民张开双臂欢迎各国人民搭乘中国发展的“快车”、“便车”。
We Chinese know only too well what it takes to achieve prosperity, so we applaud the achievements made by others and wish them a better future. We are not jealous of others' success; and we will not complain about others who have benefited so much from the great opportunities presented by China's development. We will open our arms to the people of other countries and welcome them aboard the express train of China's development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
很多人都在关注中国经济发展趋势。中国经济发展进入了新常态，经济增速、经济发展方式、经济结构、经济发展动力都正在发生重大变化。但中国经济长期向好的基本面没有改变。	
I know you are all closely following China's economic development, and let me give you an update on the state of China's economy. China's economy has entered what we call a new normal, in which major changes are taking place in terms of growth rate, development model, economic structure and drivers of growth. But the economic fundamentals sustaining sound development remain unchanged.
2016年，在世界经济疲弱的背景下，中国经济预计增长6.7%，依然处于世界前列。现在，中国经济的体量已不能同过去同日而语，集聚的动能是过去两位数的增长都达不到的。中国居民消费和服务业成为经济增长的主要动力，2016年前三季度第三产业增加值占国内生产总值的比重为52.8%，国内消费对经济增长的贡献率达71%。居民收入和就业实现稳定增长，单位国内生产总值能耗持续下降，绿色发展初见成效。	
Despite a sluggish global economy, China's economy is expected to grow by 6.7% in 2016, still one of the highest in the world. China's economy is far bigger in size than in the past, and it now generates more output than it did with double-digit growth in the past. Household consumption and the services sector have become the main drivers of growth. In the first three quarters of 2016, added value of the tertiary industry took up 52.8% of the GDP and domestic consumption contributed to 71% of economic growth. Household income and employment have steadily risen, while per unit GDP energy consumption continues to drop. Our efforts to pursue green development are paying off.
当前，中国经济面临一定的下行压力和不少困难，如产能过剩和需求结构升级矛盾突出，经济增长内生动力不足，金融风险有所积聚，部分地区困难增多。我们认为，这些都是前进中必然出现的阶段性现象，对这些问题和矛盾，我们正在着力加以解决，并不断取得积极成效。我们坚定向前发展的决心不会动摇。中国仍然是世界上最大的发展中国家，中国有13亿多人口，人民生活水平还不高，但这也意味着巨大的发展潜力和空间。我们将在创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念指引下，不断适应、把握、引领中国经济发展新常态，统筹抓好稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险工作，推动中国经济保持中高速增长、迈向中高端水平。	
The Chinese economy faces downward pressure and many difficulties, including acute mismatch between excess capacity and an upgrading demand structure, lack of internal driving force for growth, accumulation of financial risks, and growing challenges in certain regions. We see these as temporary hardships that occur on the way forward. And the measures we have taken to address these problems are producing good results. We are firm in our resolve to forge ahead. China is the world's largest developing country with over 1.3 billion people, and their living standards are not yet high. But this reality also means China has enormous potential and space for development. Guided by the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, we will adapt to the new normal, stay ahead of the curve, and make coordinated efforts to maintain steady growth, accelerate reform, adjust economic structure, improve people's living standards and fend off risks. With these efforts, we aim to achieve medium-high rate of growth and upgrade the economy to higher end of the value chain.
——中国将着力提升经济增长质量和效益，围绕供给侧结构性改革这条主线，转变经济发展方式，优化经济结构，积极推进去产能、去库存、去杠杆、降成本、补短板，培育增长新动能，发展先进制造业，实现实体经济升级，深入实施“互联网+”行动计划，扩大有效需求，更好满足人们个性化、多样化的需求，更好保护生态环境。	
— China will strive to enhance the performance of economic growth. We will pursue supply-side structural reform as the general goal, shift the growth model and upgrade the economic structure. We will continue to cut overcapacity, reduce inventory, deleverage financing, reduce cost and strengthen weak links. We will foster new drivers of growth, develop an advanced manufacturing sector and upgrade the real economy. We will implement the Internet Plus action plan to boost effective demand and better meet the individualized and diverse needs of consumers. And we will do more to protect the ecosystem.
——中国将不断激发增长动力和市场活力，加大重要领域和关键环节改革力度，让市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，牵住创新这个“牛鼻子”，推进创新驱动发展战略，推动战略性新兴产业发展，注重用新技术新业态改造提升传统产业，促进新动能发展壮大、传统动能焕发生机。	
— China will boost market vitality to add new impetus to growth. We will intensify reform efforts in priority areas and key links and enable the market to play a decisive role in resources allocation. Innovation will continue to feature prominently on our growth agenda. In pursuing the strategy of innovation-driven development, we will bolster the strategic emerging industries, apply new technologies and foster new business models to upgrade traditional industries; and we will boost new drivers of growth and revitalize traditional ones.
——中国将积极营造宽松有序的投资环境，放宽外商投资准入，建设高标准自由贸易试验区，加强产权保护，促进公平竞争，让中国市场更加透明、更加规范。预计未来5年，中国将进口8万亿美元的商品、吸收6000亿美元的外来投资，对外投资总额将达到7500亿美元，出境旅游将达到7亿人次。这将为世界各国提供更广阔市场、更充足资本、更丰富产品、更宝贵合作契机。对各国工商界而言，中国发展仍然是大家的机遇。中国的大门对世界始终是打开的，不会关上。开着门，世界能够进入中国，中国也才能走向世界。我们希望，各国的大门也对中国投资者公平敞开。	
— China will foster an enabling and orderly environment for investment. We will expand market access for foreign investors, build high-standard pilot free trade zones, strengthen protection of property rights, and level the playing field to make China's market more transparent and better regulated. In the coming five years, China is expected to import eight trillion US dollars of goods, attract 600 billion US dollars of foreign investment and make 750 billion US dollars of outbound investment. Chinese tourists will make 700 million overseas visits. All this will create a bigger market, more capital, more products and more business opportunities for other countries. China's development will continue to offer opportunities to business communities in other countries. China will keep its door wide open and not close it. An open door allows both other countries to access the Chinese market and China itself to integrate with the world. And we hope that other countries will also keep their door open to Chinese investors and keep the playing field level for us.
——中国将大力建设共同发展的对外开放格局，推进亚太自由贸易区建设和区域全面经济伙伴关系协定谈判，构建面向全球的自由贸易区网络。中国一贯主张建设开放透明、互利共赢的区域自由贸易安排，而不是搞排他性、碎片化的小圈子。中国无意通过人民币贬值提升贸易竞争力，更不会主动打货币战。	
— China will vigorously foster an external environment of opening-up for common development. We will advance the building of the Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific and negotiations of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership to form a global network of free trade arrangements. China stands for concluding open, transparent and win-win regional free trade arrangements and opposes forming exclusive groups that are fragmented in nature. China has no intention to boost its trade competitiveness by devaluing the RMB, still less will it launch a currency war.
3年多前，我提出了“一带一路”倡议。3年多来，已经有100多个国家和国际组织积极响应支持，40多个国家和国际组织同中国签署合作协议，“一带一路”的“朋友圈”正在不断扩大。中国企业对沿线国家投资达到500多亿美元，一系列重大项目落地开花，带动了各国经济发展，创造了大量就业机会。可以说，“一带一路”倡议来自中国，但成效惠及世界。	
Over three years ago, I put forward the "Belt and Road" initiative. Since then, over 100 countries and international organizations have given warm responses and support to the initiative. More than 40 countries and international organizations have signed cooperation agreements with China, and our circle of friends along the "Belt and Road" is growing bigger. Chinese companies have made over 50 billion US dollars of investment and launched a number of major projects in the countries along the routes, spurring the economic development of these countries and creating many local jobs. The "Belt and Road" initiative originated in China, but it has delivered benefits well beyond its borders.
今年5月，中国将在北京主办“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛，共商合作大计，共建合作平台，共享合作成果，为解决当前世界和区域经济面临的问题寻找方案，为实现联动式发展注入新能量，让“一带一路”建设更好造福各国人民。	
In May this year, China will host in Beijing the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, which aims to discuss ways to boost cooperation, build cooperation platforms and share cooperation outcomes. The forum will also explore ways to address problems facing global and regional economy, create fresh energy for pursuing inter-connected development and make the "Belt and Road" initiative deliver greater benefits to people of countries involved.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
世界历史发展告诉我们，人类文明进步历程从来没有平坦的大道可走，人类就是在同困难的斗争中前进的。再大的困难，都不可能阻挡人类前行的步伐。遇到了困难，不要埋怨自己，不要指责他人，不要放弃信心，不要逃避责任，而是要一起来战胜困难。历史是勇敢者创造的。让我们拿出信心、采取行动，携手向着未来前进！	
World history shows that the road of human civilization has never been a smooth one, and that mankind has made progress by surmounting difficulties. No difficulty, however daunting, will stop mankind from advancing. When encountering difficulties, we should not complain about ourselves, blame others, lose confidence or run away from responsibilities. We should join hands and rise to the challenge. History is created by the brave. Let us boost confidence, take actions and march arm-in-arm toward a bright future.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!
41. 习近平在APEC工商领导人峰会上的演讲
同舟共济创造美好未来
Jointly Charting a Course Toward a Brighter Future
——在亚太经合组织工商领导人峰会上的主旨演讲
（2018年11月17日，莫尔斯比港）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the APEC CEO Summit
Port Moresby, 17 November 2018
尊敬的奥尼尔总理，
尊敬的陶里卡主席，
各位工商界朋友，
女士们，先生们：
Honorable Prime Minister Peter O’Neill,
Chairman Isikeli Taureka,
Members of the business community,
Ladies and gentlemen,
大家好！很高兴来到景色宜人的莫尔斯比港，同大家相聚在太平洋探索者号上。在当今世界经济风起云涌、风险挑战凸显的形势下，我们同在一条船上，一起谋划发展合作，具有特别的意义。
Good Morning! It gives me great pleasure to come to the picturesque city of Port Moresby and meet with you on board Pacific Explorer. As we brave the rough waters of the global economy and confront the many risks and challenges, it is all too befitting that we have come together on this ship to chart the course for future development and cooperation.
这次工商峰会的主题“在颠覆性变革时代促进包容：规划共同未来”，寓意深刻。当今世界正处于大发展大变革大调整时期。经济全球化大潮滚滚向前，但保护主义、单边主义为世界经济增长蒙上了阴影。新科技革命和产业变革蓄势待发，但增长新旧动能转换尚未完成。国际格局深刻演变，但发展失衡未有根本改观。全球治理体系加快变革，但治理滞后仍是突出挑战。
The theme of this CEO Summit, “Inclusion in the Age of Disruption: Charting a Common Future”, couldn’t be more important. The world today is going through major development, transformation and change. While economic globalization surges forward, global growth is shadowed by protectionism and unilateralism. A new revolution in science, technology and industry is in the making; but old driving forces are yet to be replaced by new ones. The international landscape is undergoing profound changes, but imbalance in development is yet to be addressed. The reform of the global governance system is gathering momentum, but improving its efficiency remains a major challenge.
当今世界的变局百年未有，变革会催生新的机遇，但变革过程往往充满着风险挑战，人类又一次站在了十字路口。合作还是对抗？开放还是封闭？互利共赢还是零和博弈？如何回答这些问题，关乎各国利益，关乎人类前途命运。
The changes we are encountering in the world are unseen in a century. Changes create opportunities, but more often than not, they are accompanied by risks and challenges. Mankind has once again reached a crossroads. Which direction should we choose? Cooperation or confrontation? Openness or closing one’s door? Win-win progress or a zero-sum game? The interests of all countries and indeed, the future of mankind hinge on the choice we make.
回顾近代以来的世界历史，我们可以清楚地看到，不同选择曾经给世界带来迥异的历史轨迹。
A review of the world’s modern history clearly shows that different choices would lead the world onto different paths.
亚太地区有着亚太经合组织这样的成功故事。亚太经合组织的诞生和发展顺应了开放融合的历史潮流，顺应了亚太地区谋求发展的强烈愿望，顺应了各国人民携手应对挑战的共同需要。亚太的开放合作不仅激荡着太平洋，也活跃了世界经济的海洋。如今的亚太，是全球最具增长活力和发展潜力的经济板块，也是举世公认的世界经济增长的一个重要引擎。
In the Asia-Pacific, the establishment of APEC is such a success story. Its birth and growth echoed the historical trend of openness and integration, our region’s fervent desire for development and our people’s need to meet challenges through cooperation. Openness and cooperation in the Asia-Pacific has not only boosted its prosperity but also injected vitality into the vast ocean of global economy. Today’s Asia-Pacific has the world’s most dynamic and promising economy, which is recognized as a key engine driving global growth.
然而，不是所有故事都这么美好，人类也有过惨痛教训。上世纪发生的第二次世界大战，让人类陷入了滔天浩劫。就在离我们不远的地方，曾经爆发第二次世界大战期间惨烈的珊瑚海战役、瓜达尔卡纳尔战役。今天，这片海面已经波澜不惊，但我们不能忘却历史上的风风雨雨。
However, not all that happened in the past are success stories. Mankind has learned lessons the hard way. World War II, for instance, plunged mankind into the abyss of calamity in the last century. Not far away from where we are meeting now are the sites of the fierce Battle of the Coral Sea and the Battle of Guadalcanal in World War II. Today, this part of the ocean has long restored its peace and calm, but never should we forget the lessons of history.
“明镜所以照形，古事所以知今。”我们回顾历史，是要以史为鉴，不让历史悲剧重演。面对历史大潮，如何才能为世界经济发展把握正确方向？如何才能为国际社会找到有效治理思路？这里，我愿提出以下主张。
An ancient Chinese philosopher observed that one needs to clean the mirror before taking a look at himself and that one should learn the lessons of the past before making decisions of the day. In reviewing history, we should draw its lessons to prevent the recurrence of past tragedies. Facing the surging historical trend, we need to ask ourselves: How can we steer the right course for global economic development? How can the international community find an effective way of conducting global governance? I believe it is imperative that we keep the following focuses:
第一，坚持开放导向，拓展发展空间。经济全球化是人类社会发展必经之路，多边贸易体制为各国带来了共同机遇。在各国相互依存日益紧密的今天，全球供应链、产业链、价值链紧密联系，各国都是全球合作链条中的一环，日益形成利益共同体、命运共同体。
First, we should focus on openness to create more space for development. Economic globalization is the sure way for the human society to achieve development, and the multilateral trading system has created opportunities for us all. In today’s world, countries’ interests are so closely intertwined, and the global supply chain, industrial chain and value chain are so closely connected. We are all links of the global chain of cooperation; increasingly, we are becoming one and same community with shared interests and a shared future.
这是经济规律使然，不以人的意志为转移。我们应该把握时代大势，客观认识世界发展变化，以负责任、合规矩的方式应对新情况新挑战。如果人为设置壁垒，切断各国经济上的密切联系，不仅违背经济规律和历史潮流，也不符合各国人民普遍愿望，既是短视的，也是不会成功的。
This is the working of the laws of economics, a fact no one can change. We need to gain a keen appreciation of this underlying trend of our times and view the changing world for what it is and, on that basis, respond to new developments and meet new challenges in a responsible and rules-based way. Attempts to erect barriers and cut the close economic ties among countries work against the laws of economics and the trend of history and run counter to the shared desire of people around the world. This is a short-sighted approach and it is doomed to failure.
一个时代有一个时代的问题。问题本身并不可怕，关键是采取正确的办法来解决问题。走保护主义、单边主义的老路，不仅解决不了问题，还会加剧世界经济的不确定性。历史已经证明，只有坚持开放合作才能获得更多发展机遇和更大发展空间，自我封闭只会失去世界，最终也会失去自己。
Each era faces problems of its day. Problems themselves are not to be afraid of; what truly matters is for us to take a right approach to resolve the problems. Resorting to old practices such as protectionism and unilateralism will not resolve problems. On the contrary, they can only add uncertainties to the global economy. Only openness and cooperation can bring more opportunities and create more space for development. This is a well proven historical fact. One who chooses to close his door will only cut himself off from the rest of the world and lose his direction.
亚太经合组织是建设开放型世界经济的先驱。茂物目标将于2020年到期，我们应该着眼2020年后合作愿景，坚持推进亚太自由贸易区建设。我们应该旗帜鲜明反对保护主义、单边主义，维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展，在开放中扩大共同利益，在合作中实现机遇共享。
APEC is a pioneer in building an open global economy. As the Bogor Goals are set for 2020, we should set our sights on post-2020 cooperation and endeavor to build a free trade area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP). We should say no to protectionism and unilateralism, uphold the WTO-centered multilateral trading system, make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all, and expand converging interests and share opportunities through opening-up and cooperation.
第二，坚持发展导向，增进人民福祉。我们应该把人民福祉放在首位。世界上所有国家都享有平等的发展权利，任何人都无权也不能阻挡发展中国家人民对美好生活的追求。我们应该致力于加强发展合作，帮助发展中国家摆脱贫困，让所有国家的人民都过上好日子。这才是最大的公平，也是国际社会的道义责任。
Second, we should focus on development to deliver more benefits to our peoples. More than anything else, we should strive to deliver better lives to our people. Every country is entitled to an equal right to development; and no one has the right or the power to stop people in developing countries from pursuing a better life. We should strengthen development cooperation and help developing countries eliminate poverty so that people in all countries will live better lives. This is what fairness is essentially about; it is also a moral responsibility of the international community.
我们应该把落实2030年可持续发展议程纳入本国发展战略，促进经济、社会、环境协调发展，根据自身国情推动普惠发展，积极构建平等均衡的全球发展伙伴关系。发达国家应该履行官方发展援助承诺，增加对广大发展中国家的支持。
We should make the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development a part of our national development strategies, promote coordinated advances in the economic, social and environmental fields, pursue inclusive development in keeping with our respective national conditions, and forge equal and balanced global development partnerships. Developed countries should honor their commitments on official development assistance and increase support to developing countries.
我们应该加强发展在国际经济政策协调中的地位，在讨论制定贸易和投资、知识产权保护、数字经济等各领域政策和规则时应该有明确的发展视角，为各国营造共同的发展机遇和空间，为世界经济增长提供强劲动力和稳定环境。“特殊与差别待遇”是世界贸易组织的重要基石。这一原则不能否定，否则将动摇多边贸易体制的根基。
We should give priority to development in international economic policy coordination and have a clear focus on development when adopting policies and rules on trade and investment, IPR protection, the digital economy and other areas. By doing so, we can create more opportunities and a more enabling environment for the development of all countries as well as robust drivers and a stable environment for global growth. The principle of “special and differential treatment”, which is a cornerstone of the WTO, is not to be challenged. Otherwise the very foundation of the multilateral trading system will be shaken.
第三，坚持包容导向，促进交融互鉴。我们共同居住在同一个星球上，这个星球有200多个国家和地区、2500多个民族、70多亿人口，搞清一色是不可能的。这种差异不应该成为交流的障碍，更不能成为对抗的理由。不同文明、制度、道路的多样性及交流互鉴可以为人类社会进步提供强大动力。我们应该少一点傲慢和偏见、多一些尊重和包容，拥抱世界的丰富多样，努力做到求同存异、取长补短，谋求和谐共处、合作共赢。
Third, we should focus on inclusiveness and promote interactions. We live on the same planet. It is home to more than 200 countries and regions, 2,500-plus ethnic groups and over 7 billion people. Trying to erase their differences will not work. Such differences are not a hindrance to exchanges, still less a cause for confrontation. Diversity and interaction between different civilizations, social systems and paths can provide strong impetus for human progress. We should reject arrogance and prejudice, be respectful of and inclusive toward others, and embrace the diversity of our world. We should seek common ground while putting aside differences, draw upon each other’s strengths and pursue co-existence in harmony and win-win cooperation.
一个国家走什么样的道路，只有这个国家的人民最有发言权。一副药方不可能包治百病，一种模式也不可能解决所有国家的问题。生搬硬套或强加于人都会引起水土不服。
When it comes to choosing a development path for a country, no one is in a better position to make the decision than the people of that country. Just as one does not expect a single prescription to cure all diseases, one should not expect a particular model of development to fit all countries. Blindly copying the development model of others will only be counterproductive, so will be any attempt to impose one’s own development model on others.
第四，坚持创新导向，开辟增长源泉。当前，信息技术、生命科学、智能制造、绿色能源等前沿领域不断突破，新材料、新产品、新业态迭代周期不断缩短。大数据、3D打印、人工智能，这些曾经的科学幻想，如今已经融入人们的衣食住行用，未来已经来到我们身边。
Fourth, we should focus on innovation to tap new sources of growth. Breakthroughs are being made one after another in frontier areas such as information technology, life sciences, smart manufacturing and green energy, and new materials, new products and new business forms are replacing existing ones at a faster pace. Big data, 3D printing and artificial intelligence, which we read about only in science fiction in the past, are now part of our daily life. The future is already with us.
百舸争流，奋楫者先。新科技革命和产业变革的时代浪潮奔腾而至，如果我们不应变、不求变，将错失发展机遇，甚至错过整个时代。我们应该以只争朝夕的精神，探寻新的增长动力和发展路径，消除一切不利于创新的体制机制障碍，充分激发创新潜能和市场活力，深化国际创新交流合作，更好应对各自和共同的发展挑战。
In a boat race, those who row the hardest will win. If we do not move proactively to adapt to the surging tide of new scientific revolution and industrial transformation, we risk missing valuable opportunities or even falling behind the times. What we should do is to lose no time in making every effort to explore new growth drivers and development paths, and remove all institutional obstacles holding back innovation. We should boost innovation and market vitality and deepen international exchanges and cooperation on innovation so as to better meet our respective and common challenges in development.
新科技革命和产业变革是一次全方位变革，将对人类生产模式、生活方式、价值理念产生深刻影响。公平和效率、资本和劳动、技术和就业的关系成为国际社会的共同课题，处理不当将导致南北贫富差距进一步拉大。我们应该审时度势、科学决策，引领新科技革命和产业变革朝着正确方向发展。
The sweeping new scientific revolution and industrial transformation will have a profound impact on the mode of production, way of life and values of human society. The need to strike a balance between equity and efficiency, capital and labor, technology and employment has become a common challenge for the international community. If not handled properly, this issue will further widen the wealth gap between the North and the South. We should gain a keen understanding of the complex dimensions of this issue and make the right decision. This will enable us to steer the new scientific revolution and industrial transformation in the right direction.
服务人民是科技创新的本质要求，各国都有权通过自身努力和国际合作从科技创新中受益。科技创新成果不应该被封锁起来，不应该成为只为少数人牟利的工具。设立知识产权制度的目的是保护和激励创新，而不是制造甚至扩大科技鸿沟。我们应该共同探讨建立面向新科技革命和产业变革的政策制度体系，营造国际合作环境，让科技创新成果为更多国家和人民所及、所享、所用。
Scientific and technological innovations should meet people’s needs. Every country is entitled to benefit from such innovations made through both their own efforts and international cooperation. Scientific and technological innovations should not be locked up or become profit-making tools for just a few. The IPR regime is designed to protect and encourage innovation, not to create or widen the scientific and technological divide. We should develop policy institutions and systems that are responsive to the new scientific revolution and industrial transformation, and foster an enabling environment for international cooperation that will deliver the fruits of innovation to more countries and peoples.
第五，坚持规则导向，完善全球治理。两次世界大战的惨痛教训让各国人民痛定思痛，建立了以联合国为主体，包括国际货币基金组织、世界银行、世界贸易组织等机制的全球治理框架。虽然这个框架并不完美，却是人类社会迈出的重要一步，为过去几十年世界和平与发展发挥了重要作用。以规则为基础加强全球治理是实现稳定发展的必要前提。规则应该由国际社会共同制定，而不是谁的胳膊粗、气力大谁就说了算，更不能搞实用主义、双重标准，合则用、不合则弃。
Fifth, we should focus on a rules-based approach to improve global governance. With the painful lessons of two world wars in mind, countries established the global governance framework underpinned by the United Nations and composed of the IMF, the World Bank, the WTO and other institutions. This framework, while not an ideal one, represents an important step in human history. Indeed, it has been pivotal to global peace and development in the past decades. We must strengthen rules-based global governance if we are to achieve stability and development. Rules should be formulated by the international community, not in a might-is-right way. Once the rules are made, they should not be followed or bent as one sees fit, and they should not be applied with double standards for selfish agendas.
全球经济治理体系要想公平有效，必须跟上时代。我们应该秉持共商共建共享理念，推动全球经济治理体系变革。变革过程应该体现平等、开放、透明、包容精神，提高发展中国家代表性和发言权，遇到分歧应该通过协商解决，不能搞小圈子，不能强加于人。历史告诉我们，如果走上对抗的道路，无论是冷战、热战还是贸易战，都不会有真正的赢家。国与国只要平等相待、互谅互让，就没有通过协商解决不了的问题。
For the system of global economic governance to be equitable and efficient, it must keep up with the times. We should advance the reform of the global governance system on the principle of conducting consultation and collaboration for shared benefits. This reform should be advanced on the basis of equality, openness, transparency and inclusiveness. Developing countries should have more say and greater representation in this process. Disagreements should be resolved through consultation. Attempts to form exclusive blocs or impose one’s will on others should be rejected. History has shown that confrontation, whether in the form of a cold war, a hot war or a trade war, will produce no winners. We believe that there exist no issues that countries cannot resolve through consultation as long as they handle these issues in a spirit of equality, mutual understanding and accommodation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen,
Friends,
1978年，中国改革开放的伟大征程拉开了序幕。40年来，中国人民依靠自己的智慧和勤劳的双手，在风雨中砥砺前行，迎来了从站起来、富起来到强起来的历史飞跃，开启了中华民族伟大复兴的光辉历程。
In 1978, China embarked on the great journey of reform and opening-up. Over the past 40 years, the Chinese people, with vision, hard work and perseverance, have forged ahead and taken a historic stride. We have stood up, become prosperous and grown in strength. We the Chinese nation are moving forward toward great rejuvenation.
——40年来，中国人民勇于探索、真抓实干，凭着一股开拓创新的拼劲，一股自力更生的韧劲，把中国建成了世界第二大经济体，中国的面貌、中国人民的面貌发生了翻天覆地的变化。中国的今天，是中国人民干出来的！
— Over the past 40 years, the Chinese people have blazed a new trail and made solid progress. With enterprise and grit and through self-reliance, we have turned China into the world’s second biggest economy, making tremendous advances in our country’s development and the improvement of people’s lives. It is the relentless efforts of the Chinese people that have made China what it is today!
——40年来，中国人民敞开胸怀、拥抱世界，坚持打开国门搞建设，中国货物进出口总额增长198倍，服务贸易进出口总额增长超过147倍，累计吸引外资超过2万亿美元，中国已经成为世界第一大货物贸易国、最大的旅游市场、130多个国家的主要贸易伙伴。
— Over the past 40 years, the Chinese people have embraced the world with open arms. China has pursued its development through opening-up. As a result, China’s import and export of goods have grown by 198 times and those of services by over 147 times. China has attracted more than US$2 trillion in foreign investment. It has become the world’s biggest trader of goods, the biggest tourism market and a major trading partner with over 130 countries.
——40年来，中国人民聚焦发展、造福人民，坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，从1978年到2017年，中国人均可支配收入增长22.8倍，贫困人口减少了7.4亿，就业人员翻了一番，城乡免费义务教育全面实现，世界上覆盖人口最多的社会保障体系基本建立，中国人民的获得感、幸福感、安全感显著提高。
— Over the past 40 years, the Chinese people have pursued development with a single focus and made lives better for ourselves. Guided by a people-centered development philosophy, between 1978 and 2017 China raised its per capita disposable income by 22.8 times, lifted 740 million people out of poverty and doubled the number of jobs created. We have achieved free compulsory primary and middle-school education nationwide and established the world’s biggest social safety net. Thanks to these accomplishments, our people now feel more secure and have a greater sense of fulfillment and contentment.
——40年来，中国人民立己达人、共谋发展，始终不渝走和平发展道路，积极参与全球经济治理，积极支持广大发展中国家发展，实施负责任的宏观经济政策，保持对世界经济增长的较高贡献率，为应对亚洲金融危机、国际金融危机作出了自己的贡献，为推动构建人类命运共同体贡献了智慧和力量。
— Over the past 40 years, the Chinese people have pursued our own development to achieve development for all. China has stayed on the path of peaceful development, got actively involved in global economic governance, and actively supported other developing countries in their development. We have implemented responsible macroeconomic policies and contributed a significant share of global growth. We have played our part in responding to the Asian financial crisis and the global financial crisis. By so doing, China has contributed its vision and input to building a community with a shared future for mankind.
5年前，我提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的就是促进各国各地区互联互通，形成联动发展格局，为世界经济拓展新的增长空间。5年来，共建“一带一路”倡议广受欢迎，中国已经同140多个国家和国际组织签署共建“一带一路”合作协议，一大批重大合作项目已经落地生根。
Five years ago, I announced the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), which aims to enhance connectivity among countries and regions, promote interconnected development, and create new space for global growth. This initiative has won wide international endorsement in the past five years. China has signed BRI cooperation documents with over 140 countries and international organizations, and a large number of cooperation projects have been launched under this Initiative.
我要强调的是，共建“一带一路”是开放的合作平台，秉持的是共商共建共享的基本原则，没有地缘政治目的，不针对谁也不排除谁，不会关起门来搞小圈子，不是有人说的这样那样的所谓“陷阱”，而是中国同世界共享机遇、共谋发展的阳光大道。中国将于明年4月在北京举办第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。欢迎亚太工商界朋友积极参与。
Let me make this clear: the BRI is an open platform for cooperation. It is guided by the principle of consultation and collaboration for shared benefits. It is not designed to serve any hidden geopolitical agenda, it is not targeted against anyone and it does not exclude anyone. It is not an exclusive club that is closed to non-members, nor is it a “trap” as some people have labeled it. Rather, the BRI is a major and transparent initiative with which China shares opportunities and pursues common development with the rest of the world. In April next year, China will host the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation in Beijing, and we welcome members of the Asia-Pacific business community to this event.
回首40年改革开放历程，中国人民更加坚定地认识到，只有改革开放才能发展中国。面向未来，中国将以更负责的精神、更开放包容的胸襟、更高质量的增长，在实现自身发展的同时，为世界各国共同繁荣作出更大贡献。
As we look back over the four decades of reform and opening-up, we in China are more convinced than ever before that only through reform and opening-up can China develop itself. Going forward, China will take an even more responsible approach, be even more open and inclusive, and strive to achieve even higher quality of growth. By doing so, as it develops itself, China will make greater contributions to the common prosperity of the world.
中国将继续大幅放宽市场准入，加强知识产权保护，主动扩大进口。今年以来，中国陆续宣布了一系列新的开放举措，包括创造更具吸引力的投资营商环境，大幅降低1449种日用消费品、1585种工业品等商品进口关税，将汽车整车和零部件税率分别降到13.8%和6%，实现进口抗癌药全部零关税。随着11月1日新一轮降税措施实施，中国关税总水平已经降到7.5%，超出了对世界贸易组织的承诺，也低于大多数发展中国家。中国发布了外商投资准入新的负面清单，在金融、汽车、飞机、船舶等领域进一步开放。根据世界银行的报告，中国营商环境排名比去年提升30多位，成为营商环境改善幅度最大的经济体之一。中国对内外资企业一视同仁、平等对待，欢迎和鼓励各类企业公平竞争，也将充分保障它们的合法权益。
China will continue to significantly expand market access, strengthen IPR protection, and do more to increase imports. Since the beginning of this year, China has announced a host of new measures for further opening-up, which include the following: creating a more attractive investment and business environment, significantly lowering the tariffs for 1,449 consumer goods and 1,585 industrial goods, further cutting the tariffs for automobiles and auto parts to 13.8 percent and 6 percent respectively, and eliminating tariffs on all imported anti-cancer drugs. With a new round of tariff cuts coming into effect on 1 November, China’s overall tariff rates have been reduced to 7.5 percent, lower than the majority of developing countries and beyond the commitment China made upon its accession to the WTO. China has released a new negative list on foreign investment, and will further open up finance, automobiles, aircraft, ships and other sectors. According to a recent World Bank report, China has moved up over 30 places in the ease of doing business ranking over the past year and is among the economies with the most significant improvement. China views all companies, both Chinese and foreign, as equals. China welcomes and encourages fair competition among them, and will fully protect their legitimate rights and interests.
一周前，首届中国国际进口博览会在上海成功举行，吸引了172个国家、地区和国际组织，3600多家企业参展，40多万名境内外采购商到会洽谈采购，成交额达到578亿美元。4500多名各界知名人士出席虹桥国际经贸论坛。中国用行动证明了支持贸易自由化、主动向世界开放市场的决心。欢迎大家明年参加第二届中国国际进口博览会。我相信，中国近14亿人口的大市场必将成为世界经济的增长之源、活力之源！
A week ago, the first China International Import Expo (CIIE) was successfully held in Shanghai. It was attended by 172 countries, regions and international organizations, over 3,600 companies, and more than 400,000 Chinese and foreign buyers. Deals worth US$57.8 billion were sealed. The Hongqiao International Economic and Trade Forum, held as part of the Expo, attracted over 4,500 leading personalities from various sectors around the world. With such actual steps, China has demonstrated its commitment to trade liberalization and opening-up of its market. I wish to welcome you all to the second CIIE to be held next year. I am confident that the large market of China, with a population of close to 1.4 billion, will be a source of dynamic growth for the global economy.
在座许多企业家都是中国改革开放的见证者、贡献者、受益者，同中国结下了不解之缘。工商界是引领亚太和世界经济增长的重要力量。希望你们发挥企业家精神，勇做经济全球化的弄潮儿，继续为决策者提出明智建议，推动各国采取积极务实政策，广泛开展经济技术合作，为亚太地区乃至世界共同发展繁荣闯出新的天地。
Many of you present today have witnessed, contributed to and benefited from China’s reform and opening-up, and have forged a special bond with China. The business community is an important force driving the economic development of the Asia-Pacific and the wider world. As entrepreneurs, you should bring out your best and ride the waves of economic globalization. I hope you will continue to share your insights with decision makers, encourage countries to adopt positive and practical policies and carry out extensive economic and technological cooperation. Together, we can open a new horizon for the common development and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific and the world at large.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen,
Dear friends,
亚太经合组织因水结缘。刚才登船时，望着广袤无边的大海，我想到了“同舟共济”这个词。让我们握稳舵盘、把准航向、齐力划桨、乘风破浪，共同驾驶着世界经济的大船驶向更加美好的彼岸！
We APEC member economies are brought together by the Pacific Ocean. I was looking at the vast ocean when I boarded the ship, and it struck me that we are all indeed fellow passengers in the same boat. Let us keep the steering wheel steady and paddle in the right direction so that the ship of the global economy will brave winds, break waves and sail to a brighter future.
谢谢大家。
Thank you!
56. 习近平在博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会开幕式上的主旨演讲
开放共创繁荣 创新引领未来
Openness for Greater Prosperity, Innovation for a Better Future
中华人民共和国主席习近平出席博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会开幕式并发表主旨演讲
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening of the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2018
Boao, 10 April 2018
尊敬的各位元首，
政府首脑，
国际组织负责人，部长，
尊敬的各位博鳌亚洲论坛现任和候任理事
各位来宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Heads of International Organizations,
Ministers,
Incumbent and Incoming Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia,
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
仲春时节的海南，山青海碧，日暖风轻。在这个美好的季节里，各国嘉宾汇聚一堂，出席博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会。海南有一首民歌唱道：“久久不见久久见，久久见过还想见。”大家就是这样，今天，有机会在此同各位新老朋友见面，我感到十分高兴。
Hainan today greets us with green mountains, blue ocean, gentle breeze and warm sunshine. In this beautiful season of spring, we gather here for the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2018. Such a gathering of friends, both old and new, is always a pleasant occasion, and to quote the lyrics of a Hainan folk song, “It has been a long time since we last met, and I hope it will be a long time before we have to part.”
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人名义，对各位嘉宾的到来表示诚挚的欢迎！对年会的召开表示热烈的祝贺！
Let me begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, sincere welcome to all the distinguished guests attending the Forum, and warm congratulations on the opening of the conference.
博鳌亚洲论坛成立以来，立足亚洲，面向世界，在凝聚亚洲共识、促进各方合作、推进经济全球化、推动构建人类命运共同体等方面建言献策，提出许多富有价值的“博鳌方案”，作出了积极贡献。今年是论坛理事会换届之年。借此机会，我谨向即将离任的各位理事表示衷心的感谢！对新当选的各位理事表示热烈的祝贺！
Since its inception, with a focus on Asia and a global perspective, the Boao Forum for Asia has hosted active discussions and produced many valuable “Boao proposals” that have helped build consensus in Asia, encourage cooperation, promote economic globalization and advance the building of a community with a shared future for mankind. The Forum has just had a major change of its Board of Directors this year and I wish to take this opportunity to express our heartfelt thanks to the outgoing members and warm congratulations to the new ones.
本届年会以“开放创新的亚洲，繁荣发展的世界”为主题，顺应时代潮流，符合各方期待。相信各位嘉宾和各界人士将畅所欲言，提出真知灼见。
The theme of this year’s conference is “An Open and Innovative Asia for a World of Greater Prosperity.” It is in line with the trend of the times and reflects the expectation of all parties. I am sure your engaging discussions here will produce many insights.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
历史，总是在一些特殊年份给人们以汲取智慧、继续前行的力量。2018年是中国改革开放40周年，也是海南建省办经济特区30周年。海南省可谓是“因改革开放而生，因改革开放而兴”。改革开放以来，海南从一个较为封闭落后的边陲岛屿，发展成为中国最开放、最具活力的地区之一，经济社会发展取得巨大成就。
There are certain historic occasions that empower us with the wisdom and strength to move forward. This year marks the 40th anniversary of China’s reform and opening-up, and the 30th anniversary of the establishment of the Province and Special Economic Zone of Hainan. It is reform and opening-up that has given life and prosperity to Hainan, that has turned it from the once backward and remote island into one of China’s most open and dynamic regions, and that has enabled Hainan to achieve phenomenal social and economic growth.
一滴水可以反映出太阳的光辉，一个地方可以体现一个国家的风貌。海南发展是中国40年改革开放的一个重要历史见证。
Just like the radiance of the sun is reflected by a drop of water, the development of a country may be epitomized by an individual region. Hainan stands as an important historical witness to China’s reform and opening-up over the past four decades.
1978年，在邓小平先生倡导下，以中共十一届三中全会为标志，中国开启了改革开放历史征程。从农村到城市，从试点到推广，从经济体制改革到全面深化改革，40年众志成城，40年砥砺奋进，40年春风化雨，中国人民用双手书写了国家和民族发展的壮丽史诗。
Thanks to the initiative of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee in 1978 marked the beginning of China's historic journey of reform and opening-up. Our endeavor started from rural areas to cities, from pilot programs to nationwide projects and from economic restructuring to the comprehensive deepening of reform. Reform and opening-up over the past four decades has made great impacts on China. With united and determined efforts, the Chinese people have added a glorious chapter to the development epic of the country and the nation.
——40年来，中国人民始终艰苦奋斗、顽强拼搏，极大解放和发展了中国社会生产力。古人讲，天道酬勤，春华秋实。中国人民坚持聚精会神搞建设、坚持改革开放不动摇，持之以恒，锲而不舍，推动中国发生了翻天覆地的变化。今天，中国已经成为世界第二大经济体、第一大工业国、第一大货物贸易国、第一大外汇储备国。40年来，按照可比价格计算，中国国内生产总值年均增长约9.5%；以美元计算，中国对外贸易额年均增长14.5%。中国人民生活从短缺走向充裕、从贫困走向小康，现行联合国标准下的7亿多贫困人口成功脱贫，占同期全球减贫人口总数70%以上。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have significantly unleashed and enhanced productivity in China through hard work with an unyielding spirit. Heaven rewards those who work hard, and flowers in spring come to fruition in autumn. The focused endeavor in national development and unwavering commitment to reform and opening-up of the Chinese people have brought enormous changes to the country. China has grown into the world's second largest economy, the largest industrial producer, the largest trader of goods, and the holder of the largest foreign exchange reserves. Over the past 40 years, China’s GDP has averaged an annual growth rate of around 9.5% in comparable prices and its foreign trade has registered an annual growth of 14.5% in US dollar. The Chinese people have emerged from a life of shortages and poverty and are now enjoying abundant supply and a moderately prosperous life. According to current UN standards, more than 700 million Chinese people have been lifted out of poverty, accounting for more than 70% of the global total over the same period.
——40年来，中国人民始终上下求索、锐意进取，开辟了中国特色社会主义道路。中国人民坚持立足国情、放眼世界，既强调独立自主、自力更生又注重对外开放、合作共赢，既坚持社会主义制度又坚持社会主义市场经济改革方向，既“摸着石头过河”又加强顶层设计，不断研究新情况、解决新问题、总结新经验，成功开辟出一条中国特色社会主义道路。中国人民的成功实践昭示世人，通向现代化的道路不止一条，只要找准正确方向、驰而不息，条条大路通罗马。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have blazed a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics through determined exploration with a pioneering spirit. The Chinese people have both a keen awareness of national realities and a global vision. We champion independence and self-reliance while embracing openness and win-win cooperation. We uphold the socialist system while sticking to the direction of reform to develop the socialist market economy. As we “cross the river by feeling the stones”, we have strengthened top-level planning. We have studied new circumstances, addressed new problems as they emerge and summed up experience accordingly, thus blazing a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. The successful practice of the Chinese people is a proof that there is more than one path leading to modernization. With the right direction and with unremitting efforts, all roads will take us to Rome.
——40年来，中国人民始终与时俱进、一往无前，充分显示了中国力量。中国人民坚持解放思想、实事求是，实现解放思想和改革开放相互激荡、观念创新和实践探索相互促进，充分显示了思想引领的强大力量。中国人民勇于自我革命、自我革新，不断完善中国特色社会主义制度，不断革除各方面体制弊端，充分显示了制度保障的强大力量。中国人民敢闯敢试、敢为人先，积极性、主动性、创造性空前高涨，充分显示了13亿多人民作为国家主人和真正英雄推动历史前进的强大力量。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have kept forging ahead and demonstrated the strength of the nation through keeping pace with the progress of the times. Ours is a truth-seeking nation with an open mind. Our efforts to open up our minds have advanced side by side with our endeavor of reform and opening-up. Our search for new ideas and experiment of practices have been mutually reinforcing. Such is the great strength of a guiding vision. Ours is a nation that has courageously engaged in self-revolution and self-reform, constantly made improvements to the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics, and kept overcoming institutional and systematic obstacles to development. Such is the great strength of institutional guarantee. Ours is an enterprising and pioneering nation with unprecedented motivation, initiative and creativity. Such is the great strength of the 1.3 billion Chinese people driving history forward as masters of their nation and real heroes.
——40年来，中国人民始终敞开胸襟、拥抱世界，积极作出了中国贡献。改革开放是中国和世界共同发展进步的伟大历程。中国人民坚持对外开放基本国策，打开国门搞建设，成功实现从封闭半封闭到全方位开放的伟大转折。中国在对外开放中展现大国担当，从引进来到走出去，从加入世界贸易组织到共建“一带一路”，为应对亚洲金融危机和国际金融危机作出重大贡献，连续多年对世界经济增长贡献率超过30%，成为世界经济增长的主要稳定器和动力源，促进了人类和平与发展的崇高事业。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have embraced the world with open arms and actively contributed our share to the world. Reform and opening-up is agreat process that has seen China and the world achieve development and progress together. The Chinese people have made opening-up a fundamental national policy, pursued development with an open door, and accomplished agreat transition from seclusion and semi-seclusion to all-round openness. In this process, China has lived up to its responsibility as a major country. From “bringing in” to “going global”, from WTO accession to the Belt and Road Initiative, China has made significant contribution to mitigating the Asian financial crisis and the global financial crisis. Contributing over 30% of global growth in recent years, China has become a key anchor and driver for the world economy and a positive force in advancing the noble cause of global peace and development.
今天，中国人民完全可以自豪地说，改革开放这场中国的第二次革命，不仅深刻改变了中国，也深刻影响了世界！
Today, the Chinese people can say with great pride that reform and opening-up, China’s second revolution if you like, has not only profoundly changed the country but also greatly influenced the whole world.
“天行有常”，“应之以治则吉”。中国进行改革开放，顺应了中国人民要发展、要创新、要美好生活的历史要求，契合了世界各国人民要发展、要合作、要和平生活的时代潮流。中国改革开放必然成功，也一定能够成功！
An ancient Chinese classic teaches that heaven has its own law and those who embrace it will prosper. China’s reform and opening-up meets its people’s aspiration for development, innovation and a better life. It also meets the global trend toward development, cooperation and peace. As such, China’s reform and opening-up can and will be a great success!
中国40年改革开放给人们提供了许多弥足珍贵的启示，其中最重要的一条就是，一个国家、一个民族要振兴，就必须在历史前进的逻辑中前进、在时代发展的潮流中发展。
Four decades of reform and opening-up has given us many valuable inspirations. The most important one is that for any country or nation to achieve rejuvenation, they must follow the logic of history and the trend of the times in their pursuit of progress and development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
放眼全球，当今世界正在经历新一轮大发展大变革大调整，人类面临的不稳定不确定因素依然很多。新一轮科技和产业革命给人类社会发展带来新的机遇，也提出前所未有的挑战。一些国家和地区的人民仍然生活在战争和冲突的阴影之下，很多老人、妇女、儿童依然饱受饥饿和贫穷的折磨。气候变化、重大传染性疾病等依然是人类面临的重大挑战。开放还是封闭，前进还是后退，人类面临着新的重大抉择。
The world is undergoing a new round of major development, great change and profound readjustment. Humankind still faces many instabilities and uncertainties. The new round of technological and industrial revolution brings fresh opportunities and presents unprecedented challenges. In some countries and regions, people are still living in the shadow of war and conflict. A great many people, including the old, women and children, are suffering from hunger and poverty. Climate change and major communicable diseases remain formidable challenges. Humanity has a major choice to make between openness and isolation, and between progress and retrogression.
面对复杂变化的世界，人类社会向何处去？亚洲前途在哪里？我认为，回答这些时代之问，我们要不畏浮云遮望眼，善于拨云见日，把握历史规律，认清世界大势。
In this complex and changing world, where are we headed and where is the future of Asia? To answer these fundamental questions of our time, we must not let our vision be blocked by floating clouds. Instead, we must dispel the clouds to see the sun, as we say in Chinese, so as to have a keen grasp of the law of history and the trend of the world.
当今世界，和平合作的潮流滚滚向前。和平与发展是世界各国人民的共同心声，冷战思维、零和博弈愈发陈旧落伍，妄自尊大或独善其身只能四处碰壁。只有坚持和平发展、携手合作，才能真正实现共赢、多赢。
We live at a time with an overwhelming trend toward peace and cooperation. In a world aspiring for peace and development, the cold-war and zero-sum mentality looks even more out of place. Putting oneself on a pedestal or trying to immune oneself from adverse developments will get nowhere. Only peaceful development and cooperation can truly bring win-win or all-win results.
当今世界，开放融通的潮流滚滚向前。人类社会发展的历史告诉我们，开放带来进步，封闭必然落后。世界已经成为你中有我、我中有你的地球村，各国经济社会发展日益相互联系、相互影响，推进互联互通、加快融合发展成为促进共同繁荣发展的必然选择。
We live at a time with an overwhelming trend toward openness and connectivity. Human history shows that openness leads to progress while seclusion leaves one behind. The world has become a global village where our interests are intertwined and our economic and social progress interconnected. To promote common prosperity and development in today’s world, we have no choice but to pursue greater connectivity and integrated development.
当今世界，变革创新的潮流滚滚向前。中国的先人们早在2500多年前就认识到：“苟利于民，不必法古；苟周于事，不必循俗”。变革创新是推动人类社会向前发展的根本动力。谁排斥变革，谁拒绝创新，谁就会落后于时代，谁就会被历史淘汰。
We also live at a time with an overwhelming trend toward reform and innovation. A Chinese philosopher recognized as early as over 2,500 years ago that one doesn’t have to follow a beaten path if he wishes to benefit the people and one doesn't have to observe old conventions if he wishes to get things done. Reform and innovation are the fundamental driving force of human progress. Those who reject them will be left behind and assigned to the dustbin of history.
从顺应历史潮流、增进人类福祉出发，我提出推动构建人类命运共同体的倡议，并同有关各方多次深入交换意见。我高兴地看到，这一倡议得到越来越多国家和人民的欢迎和认同，并被写进了联合国重要文件。我希望，各国人民同心协力、携手前行，努力构建人类命运共同体，共创和平、安宁、繁荣、开放、美丽的亚洲和世界。
To follow the trend of our times and advance the well-being of all people, Iproposed the initiative to build a community with a shared future for mankind and I have since had many in-depth discussions with various parties. I am glad that this proposal has been welcomed and endorsed by a growing number of countries and their peoples. It has also been written into important UN documents. I hope that people around the world will work together toward this community with a shared future for mankind and make Asia and the world peaceful, tranquil, prosperous, open and beautiful.
——面向未来，我们要相互尊重、平等相待，坚持和平共处五项原则，尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，走对话而不对抗、结伴而不结盟的国与国交往新路，不搞唯我独尊、你输我赢的零和游戏，不搞以邻为壑、恃强凌弱的强权霸道，妥善管控矛盾分歧，努力实现持久和平。
—With the future in mind, we need to treat each other with respect and as equals. We should uphold the five principles of peaceful coexistence, respect the social system and development path independently chosen by each country, respect each other’s core interests and major concerns, and follow a new approach to state-to-state relations featuring dialogue rather than confrontation, and partnership instead of alliance. We must refrain from seeking dominance and reject the zero-sum game. We must refrain from beggaring-thy-neighbor and reject power politics or hegemony with the strong bullying the weak. Instead, we must properly manage differences and work together for enduring peace.
——面向未来，我们要对话协商、共担责任，秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全理念，坚定维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序和国际体系，统筹应对传统和非传统安全挑战，深化双边和多边协作，促进不同安全机制间协调包容、互补合作，不这边搭台、那边拆台，实现普遍安全和共同安全。
—With the future in mind, we need to promote dialogue and share responsibility. We should act on the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and firmly uphold the international order and system underpinned by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. An integrated approach should be taken to counter traditional and non-traditional security challenges, and coordination should be enhanced both bilaterally and multilaterally. We must ensure that various security mechanisms coordinate with each other in an inclusive and complementary manner rather than undercut each other. This will lead us to universal and common security.
——面向未来，我们要同舟共济、合作共赢，坚持走开放融通、互利共赢之路，构建开放型世界经济，加强二十国集团、亚太经合组织等多边框架内合作，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，维护多边贸易体制，共同打造新技术、新产业、新业态、新模式，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
—With the future in mind, we need to engage in cooperation for win-win results. We should stay committed to openness, connectivity and mutual benefits, build an open global economy, and reinforce cooperation within the G20, APEC and other multilateral frameworks. We should promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, uphold the multilateral trading system, and jointly foster new technologies, new industries and new forms and models of business. This way, we will make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
——面向未来，我们要兼容并蓄、和而不同，加强双边和多边框架内文化、教育、旅游、青年、媒体、卫生、减贫等领域合作，推动文明互鉴，使文明交流互鉴成为增进各国人民友谊的桥梁、推动社会进步的动力、维护地区和世界和平的纽带。
—With the future in mind, we need to uphold inclusiveness and seek harmony without uniformity. We must strengthen bilateral and multilateral cooperation in culture, education, tourism, youth, media, health, poverty reduction and other fields. We need to promote mutual learning among civilizations as it will help us build bridges of friendship, drive social progress, and safeguard peace for the region and beyond.
——面向未来，我们要敬畏自然、珍爱地球，树立绿色、低碳、可持续发展理念，尊崇、顺应、保护自然生态，加强气候变化、环境保护、节能减排等领域交流合作，共享经验、共迎挑战，不断开拓生产发展、生活富裕、生态良好的文明发展道路，为我们的子孙后代留下蓝天碧海、绿水青山。
—With the future in mind, we need to treat nature with respect and treasure our planet. It is important to have a vision of green, low-carbon and sustainable development, and respect, accommodate and protect nature. We need to increase exchanges and cooperation, share experience and jointly meet challenges in climate change, environment protection, energy conservation and emission reduction. We must pursue further progress along the path of sustainable development featuring increased production, higher living standards and healthy ecosystems so that our future generations can enjoy blue skies, clear water and lush mountains.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
去年10月召开的中共十九大宣告中国特色社会主义进入了新时代，制定了全面建设社会主义现代化强国的宏伟蓝图。中国特色社会主义进入新时代，掀开了实现中华民族伟大复兴的新篇章，开启了加强中国同世界交融发展的新画卷。
The 19th CPC National Congress held last October ushered socialism with Chinese characteristics into a new era and drew a blueprint for turning China into a great modern socialist country in all respects. This new era of socialism with Chinese characteristics marks a new chapter in China's rejuvenation and its effort for shared prosperity with the rest of the world.
一个时代有一个时代的问题，一代人有一代人的使命。虽然我们已走过万水千山，但仍需要不断跋山涉水。在新时代，中国人民将继续自强不息、自我革新，坚定不移全面深化改革，逢山开路，遇水架桥，敢于向顽瘴痼疾开刀，勇于突破利益固化藩篱，将改革进行到底。中国人民将继续大胆创新、推动发展，坚定不移贯彻以人民为中心的发展思想，落实新发展理念，建设现代化经济体系，深化供给侧结构性改革，加快实施创新驱动发展战略、乡村振兴战略、区域协调发展战略，推进精准扶贫、精准脱贫，促进社会公平正义，不断增强人民获得感、幸福感、安全感。中国人民将继续扩大开放、加强合作，坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略，坚持引进来和走出去并重，推动形成陆海内外联动、东西双向互济的开放格局，实行高水平的贸易和投资自由化便利化政策，探索建设中国特色自由贸易港。中国人民将继续与世界同行、为人类作出更大贡献，坚定不移走和平发展道路，积极发展全球伙伴关系，坚定支持多边主义，积极参与推动全球治理体系变革，构建新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体。
Each age and generation have their own challenges and missions. China has come a long way, but it has to overcome new challenges on its way ahead. In this new era, the Chinese nation will continue to improve itself through reform. We will stay committed to advancing reform in all respects, and prevail over whatever challenges that may lie ahead. We will tackle longstanding problems with courage and resolve, and break the impediments of vested interests to see the reform through. The Chinese people will continue to take bold steps ininnovation to boost development. Following the people-centered development philosophy and the new development vision, we will modernize our economic system, deepen the supply-side structural reform, and implement at a faster pace the strategies of innovation-driven development, rural revitalization and coordinated regional development. We will continue to work on targeted poverty alleviation and promote social equity and justice to give our people a greater sense of fulfillment, happiness, and security. The Chinese people will continue to increase openness and expand cooperation. We will stay committed to the strategy of opening-up for win-win results. We will pay equal attention to “bringing in” and “going global”, and break new ground in opening China further through links running eastward and westward, across land and over sea. We will adopt policies to promote high-standard liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment, and explore the opening of free trade ports with Chinese characteristics. The Chinese people will continue to work together with the rest of the world and make greater contribution to humanity. China will stick to the path of peaceful development, actively pursue global partnerships, firmly support multilateralism, and take an active part in reforming the global governance system. By doing so, we will be able to build a new type of international relations and promote a community with a shared future for mankind.
无论中国发展到什么程度，我们都不会威胁谁，都不会颠覆现行国际体系，都不会谋求建立势力范围。中国始终是世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。
No matter how much progress China has made in development, China will not threaten anyone else, attempt to overturn the existing international system, or seek spheres of influence. China will stay as determined as ever to build world peace, contribute to global prosperity and uphold the international order.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
综合研判世界发展大势，经济全球化是不可逆转的时代潮流。正是基于这样的判断，我在中共十九大报告中强调，中国坚持对外开放的基本国策，坚持打开国门搞建设。我要明确告诉大家，中国开放的大门不会关闭，只会越开越大！
A comprehensive study of world development trajectories shows that economic globalization is an irreversible trend of our times. In line with this conclusion, I emphasized in my report to the 19th CPC National Congress that China will continue to adhere to its fundamental national policy of opening-up and pursue development with its door wide open. I wish to make it clear to all that China’s door of opening-up will not be closed and will only open even wider!
实践证明，过去40年中国经济发展是在开放条件下取得的，未来中国经济实现高质量发展也必须在更加开放条件下进行。这是中国基于发展需要作出的战略抉择，同时也是在以实际行动推动经济全球化造福世界各国人民。
What has happened proves that opening-up was key to China’s economic growth over the past 40 years and in the same vein, high-quality development of China’s economy in the future can only be achieved with greater openness. Opening-up is a strategic decision made by China based on its need for development as well as a concrete action taken by China to move economic globalization forward in a way that benefits people across the world.
在扩大开放方面，中国将采取以下重大举措。
China will adopt the following major measures to pursue further opening:
第一，大幅度放宽市场准入。今年，我们将推出几项有标志意义的举措。在服务业特别是金融业方面，去年年底宣布的放宽银行、证券、保险行业外资股比限制的重大措施要确保落地，同时要加快保险行业开放进程，放宽外资金融机构设立限制，扩大外资金融机构在华业务范围，拓宽中外金融市场合作领域。在制造业方面，目前已基本开放，保留限制的主要是汽车、船舶、飞机等少数行业，现在这些行业已经具备开放基础，下一步要尽快放宽外资股比限制特别是汽车行业外资限制。
First, we will significantly broaden market access. A number of landmark measures are to be launched this year. On services, financial services in particular, important announcement was made at the end of last year on measures to raise foreign equity caps in the banking, securities and insurance industries. We will ensure that these measures are materialized and at the same time make more moves toward further opening, including accelerating the opening-up of the insurance industry, easing restrictions on the establishment of foreign financial institutions in China and expanding their business scope, and opening up more areas of cooperation between Chinese and foreign financial markets. On manufacturing, we have basically opened up this sector with a small number of exceptions on automobiles, ships and aircraft. Now these industries are also in a position to open up. Going forward, we will ease as soon as possible foreign equity restrictions in these industries, auto mobiles in particular.
第二，创造更有吸引力的投资环境。投资环境就像空气，空气清新才能吸引更多外资。过去，中国吸引外资主要靠优惠政策，现在要更多靠改善投资环境。我们将加强同国际经贸规则对接，增强透明度，强化产权保护，坚持依法办事，鼓励竞争、反对垄断。今年3月，我们组建了国家市场监督管理总局，还有一些其他新的机构，对现有政府机构作出大幅度调整，坚决破除制约使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用、更好发挥政府作用的体制机制弊端。今年上半年，我们将完成修订外商投资负面清单工作，全面落实准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度。
Second, we will create a more attractive investment environment. Investment environmentis like air, and only fresh air attracts more investment from the outside. China relied mainly on providing favorable policies for foreign investors in the past, but now we will have to rely more on improving the investment environment. We will enhance alignment with international economic and trading rules, increase transparency, strengthen property rights protection, uphold the rule of law, encourage competition and oppose monopoly. We established a host of new agencies such as the State Administration for Market Regulation as part of a major readjustment of government institutions this past March, the purpose of which is to remove the systematic and institutional obstacles that prevent the market from playing a decisive role in resources allocation and enable the government to better play its role. In the first six months of this year, we will finish the revision of the negative list on foreign investment and implement across the board the management system based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list.
第三，加强知识产权保护。这是完善产权保护制度最重要的内容，也是提高中国经济竞争力最大的激励。对此，外资企业有要求，中国企业更有要求。今年，我们将重新组建国家知识产权局，完善加大执法力度，把违法成本显著提上去，把法律威慑作用充分发挥出来。我们鼓励中外企业开展正常技术交流合作，保护在华外资企业合法知识产权。同时，我们希望外国政府加强对中国知识产权的保护。
Third, we will strengthen protection of intellectual property rights (IPR). This is the centerpiece of the system for improving property rights protection, and it would provide the biggest boost to the competitiveness of the Chinese economy. Stronger IPR protection is the requirement of foreign enterprises, and even more so of Chinese enterprises. This year, we are re-instituting the State Intellectual Property Office to strengthen the ranks of its officers, step up law enforcement, significantly raise the cost for offenders and fully unlock the deterrent effect of relevant laws. We encourage normal technological exchanges and cooperation between Chinese and foreign enterprises, and protect the lawful IPR owned by foreign enterprises in China. At the same time, we hope foreign governments will also improve protection of Chinese IPR.
第四，主动扩大进口。内需是中国经济发展的基本动力，也是满足人民日益增长的美好生活需要的必然要求。中国不以追求贸易顺差为目标，真诚希望扩大进口，促进经常项目收支平衡。今年，我们将相当幅度降低汽车进口关税，同时降低部分其他产品进口关税，努力增加人民群众需求比较集中的特色优势产品进口，加快加入世界贸易组织《政府采购协定》进程。我们希望发达国家对正常合理的高技术产品贸易停止人为设限，放宽对华高技术产品出口管制。今年11月，我们将在上海举办首届中国国际进口博览会。这是个大平台，今后要年年办下去。这不是一般性的会展，而是我们主动开放市场的重大政策宣示和行动。欢迎各国朋友来华参加。
Fourth, we will take the initiative to expand imports. Domestic demand is the fundamental driving force for China’s economic development, and it is an essential requirement for us to meet the people’s ever-growing need for a better life. China does not seek trade surplus; we have a genuine desire to increase imports and achieve greater balance of international payments under the current account. This year, we will significantly lower the import tariffs for automobiles and reduce import tariffs for some other products. We will import more products that are competitive and needed by our people. We will seek faster progress toward joining the WTO Government Procurement Agreement. We hope developed countries will stop imposing restrictions on normal and reasonable trade of high-tech products and relax export controls on such trade with China. This November, we will hold the first China International Import Expo in Shanghai. It is not just another expo in an ordinary sense, but a major policy initiative and commitment taken of our own accord to open up the Chinese market. Friends from around the world are welcome to participate in the Expo
我想强调的是，我刚才宣布的这些对外开放重大举措，我们将尽快使之落地，宜早不宜迟，宜快不宜慢，努力让开放成果及早惠及中国企业和人民，及早惠及世界各国企业和人民。我相信，经过努力，中国金融业竞争力将明显提升，资本市场将持续健康发展，现代产业体系建设将加快推进，中国市场环境将大大改善，知识产权将得到有力保护，中国对外开放一定会打开一个全新的局面。
I wish to emphasize that with regard to all those major initiatives of opening-up that I have just announced, we have every intention to translate them into reality, sooner rather than later. We want the outcomes of our opening-up efforts to deliver benefits as soon as possible to all enterprises and people in China and around the world. I am confident that with these efforts, China's financial sector will be much more competitive, our capital market will continue to enjoy healthy development, the building of a system of modern industries will be accelerated, our market environment will be greatly improved, and intellectual property rights will be effectively protected. In short, China will enter a new phase of opening-up.
5年前，我提出了共建“一带一路”倡议。5年来，已经有80多个国家和国际组织同中国签署了合作协议。共建“一带一路”倡议源于中国，但机会和成果属于世界，中国不打地缘博弈小算盘，不搞封闭排他小圈子，不做凌驾于人的强买强卖。需要指出的是，“一带一路”建设是全新的事物，在合作中有些不同意见是完全正常的，只要各方秉持和遵循共商共建共享的原则，就一定能增进合作、化解分歧，把“一带一路”打造成为顺应经济全球化潮流的最广泛国际合作平台，让共建“一带一路”更好造福各国人民。
Five years ago, I put forward the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Since then, more than 80 countries and international organizations have signed cooperation agreements with China. The BRI may be China’s idea, but its opportunities and outcomes are going to benefit the world. China has no geopolitical calculations, seeks no exclusionary blocs and imposes no business deals on others. It must be pointed out that as the BRI is a new initiative, it is perfectly natural for there to be different views. As long as the parties embrace the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, we can surely enhance cooperation and resolve differences. This way, we can make the BRI the broadest platform for international cooperation in keeping with the trend of economic globalization and to the greater benefit of all our peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
“积土而为山，积水而为海。”幸福和美好未来不会自己出现，成功属于勇毅而笃行的人。让我们坚持开放共赢，勇于变革创新，向着构建人类命运共同体的目标不断迈进，共创亚洲和世界的美好未来！
As a Chinese saying goes, “A mountain is formed by accumulation of earth and an ocean is formed by accumulation of water.” Happiness and a bright future will not appear automatically; success only favors those with courage and perseverance. Let us dedicate ourselves to openness and win-win outcomes, be brave to change and break new ground, and keep striving for a community with a shared future for mankind and a better tomorrow for Asia and the world!
最后，预祝博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会圆满成功！
In closing, I wish this BFA Annual Conference a complete success.
谢谢大家
Thank you.
44. 习近平在首届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
共建创新包容的开放型世界经济
——在首届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2018年11月5日，上海）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together for an Open Global Economy 
That is Innovative and Inclusive 
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the Opening Ceremony of the First China International Import Expo 
Shanghai, 5 November 2018
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑、王室代表，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各代表团团长，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government, 
Your Royal Highness, 
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations, 
Your Excellencies Heads of Delegations, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
2017年5月，我宣布中国将从2018年起举办中国国际进口博览会。经过一年多筹备，在各方大力支持下，现在，首届中国国际进口博览会正式开幕了！
In May 2017, I announced China's decision to hold the China International Import Expo (CIIE) starting from 2018. Today, after more than one year of preparations and with the strong support from various parties, the first CIIE is officially opened.
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！对来自五大洲的各方朋友，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！
At the outset, I wish to express, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and also in my own name, warm welcome, sincere greetings and best wishes to you all.
中国国际进口博览会，是迄今为止世界上第一个以进口为主题的国家级展会，是国际贸易发展史上一大创举。举办中国国际进口博览会，是中国着眼于推动新一轮高水平对外开放作出的重大决策，是中国主动向世界开放市场的重大举措。这体现了中国支持多边贸易体制、推动发展自由贸易的一贯立场，是中国推动建设开放型世界经济、支持经济全球化的实际行动。
The CIIE is the world's first import expo held at the national level, an innovation in the history of global trade. It is an important decision made by China to pursue a new round of high-level opening-up, and is China's major initiative to still widen market access to the rest of the world. It demonstrates China's consistent position of supporting the multilateral trading system and promoting free trade. It is a concrete action by China to advance an open world economy and support economic globalization.
这届进口博览会以“新时代，共享未来”为主题，就是要欢迎各国朋友，把握新时代中国发展机遇，深化国际经贸合作，实现共同繁荣进步。共有172个国家、地区和国际组织参会，3600多家企业参展，展览总面积达30万平方米，超过40万名境内外采购商到会洽谈采购。
Under the theme of "New Era, Shared Future", the CIIE will help friends from around the world to seize opportunities presented by China's development in the new era and offer a platform for us to deepen international business cooperation for shared prosperity and progress. Attending the event are 172 countries, regions and international organizations, more than 3,600 companies with a total exhibition area of 300,000 square meters, and more than 400,000 Chinese and foreign buyers who are here to explore business deals.
我衷心希望，参会参展的各国朋友都能广结良缘、满载而归！
I wish all friends participating in this Expo a most pleasant and rewarding experience.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在经历新一轮大发展大变革大调整，各国经济社会发展联系日益密切，全球治理体系和国际秩序变革加速推进。同时，世界经济深刻调整，保护主义、单边主义抬头，经济全球化遭遇波折，多边主义和自由贸易体制受到冲击，不稳定不确定因素依然很多，风险挑战加剧。这就需要我们从纷繁复杂的局势中把握规律、认清大势，坚定开放合作信心，共同应对风险挑战。
The world is going through a new round of major development, transformation and adjustment. The economic and social well-being of countries in the world is increasingly interconnected. The reform of the global governance system and the international order is picking up speed. On the other hand, the world economy is going through profound adjustment, and protectionism and unilateralism are resurging. Economic globalization faces headwinds, and multilateralism and the system of free trade are under threat. Uncertainties and instabilities still abound, and risks and challenges are growing. Living in such a complex world, we need to see the underlining trend, bolster confidence in our future through opening-up and cooperation and work together to cope with risks and challenges.
世界上的有识之士都认识到，经济全球化是不可逆转的历史大势，为世界经济发展提供了强劲动力。说其是历史大势，就是其发展是不依人的意志为转移的。人类可以认识、顺应、运用历史规律，但无法阻止历史规律发生作用。历史大势必将浩荡前行。
People with vision in the world would agree that economic globalization, as an irreversible trend of history, has greatly boosted global growth. This is an overarching trend, something that is independent of people's will. What we mankind can do is to understand, adapt to, and apply the law of history instead of trying to prevent it from happening. The wheel of history, indeed, will keep rolling forward no matter what.
回顾历史，开放合作是增强国际经贸活力的重要动力。立足当今，开放合作是推动世界经济稳定复苏的现实要求。放眼未来，开放合作是促进人类社会不断进步的时代要求。
History tells us that openness and cooperation are a major driving force behind dynamic international economic and trade activities. The current situation calls for openness and cooperation to foster steady global recovery. Looking ahead, openness and cooperation will remain essential for continued human progress.
大道至简，实干为要。面对世界经济格局的深刻变化，为了共同建设一个更加美好的世界，各国都应该拿出更大勇气，积极推动开放合作，实现共同发展。
A great vision, simple and pure, requires credible actions. Given the profound shifts in the international economic landscape, the vision for a better world for all calls on countries to act with greater courage and actively champion openness and cooperation in order to secure shared development.
——各国应该坚持开放融通，拓展互利合作空间。开放带来进步，封闭必然落后。国际贸易和投资等经贸往来，植根于各国优势互补、互通有无的需要。纵观国际经贸发展史，深刻验证了“相通则共进，相闭则各退”的规律。各国削减壁垒、扩大开放，国际经贸就能打通血脉；如果以邻为壑、孤立封闭，国际经贸就会气滞血瘀，世界经济也难以健康发展。各国应该坚持开放的政策取向，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义、单边主义，提升多边和双边开放水平，推动各国经济联动融通，共同建设开放型世界经济。各国应该加强宏观经济政策协调，减少负面外溢效应，合力促进世界经济增长。各国应该推动构建公正、合理、透明的国际经贸规则体系，推进贸易和投资自由化便利化，促进全球经济进一步开放、交流、融合。
-- It is important for all countries to open wider and expand the space for mutually beneficial cooperation. Openness brings progress while seclusion leads to backwardness. Global trade and investment are driven by the need of countries for mutual exchange and complementarity. The history of economic cooperation and international trade testifies to the law that "economies make progress through exchange and inter-connectivity and fall behind because of seclusion and closedness". Efforts to reduce tariff barriers and open wider will lead to inter-connectivity in economic cooperation and global trade, while the practices of beggaring thy neighbor, isolation and seclusion will only result in trade stagnation and an unhealthy world economy. Countries need to pursue an open policy, explicitly oppose protectionism and unilateralism, and strive to enhance the level of opening-up at both multilateral and bilateral levels, so that we could make our economies interconnected and build an open world economy. We need to improve macroeconomic coordination and reduce the negative spillovers of national policies to jointly promote global economic growth. We need to establish a set of global economic and trade rules that is fair, reasonable and transparent, and promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation to make the global economy more open through greater exchanges and integration.
——各国应该坚持创新引领，加快新旧动能转换。创新是第一动力。只有敢于创新、勇于变革，才能突破世界经济发展瓶颈。世界经济刚刚走出国际金融危机阴影，回升态势尚不稳固，迫切需要各国共同推动科技创新、培育新的增长点。造福人类是科技创新最强大的动力。在休戚与共的地球村，共享创新成果，是国际社会的一致呼声和现实选择。各国应该把握新一轮科技革命和产业变革带来的机遇，加强数字经济、人工智能、纳米技术等前沿领域合作，共同打造新技术、新产业、新业态、新模式。
-- It is important for all countries to pursue innovative growth and speed up the transformation of growth drivers. Innovation is the premier engine for development. Only with bold innovation and reform can we break the bottlenecks in global growth. The world economy has just emerged from the shadow of the international financial crisis and recovery is still unstable. There is an urgent need for concerted efforts of countries in the world to promote scientific innovation and foster new growth drivers. The well-being of humanity is the biggest driving force for scientific innovation. In our inter-connected global village, to share the fruit of innovation is the common aspiration and natural choice of the world community. We need to seize the opportunities presented by the new round of technological and industrial revolution, strengthen cooperation in frontier sectors such as digital economy, artificial intelligence and nanotechnology, and work together to foster new technologies, new industries, and new forms and models of business.
——各国应该坚持包容普惠，推动各国共同发展。“一花独放不是春，百花齐放春满园。”追求幸福生活是各国人民共同愿望。人类社会要持续进步，各国就应该坚持要开放不要封闭，要合作不要对抗，要共赢不要独占。在经济全球化深入发展的今天，弱肉强食、赢者通吃是一条越走越窄的死胡同，包容普惠、互利共赢才是越走越宽的人间正道。各国应该超越差异和分歧，发挥各自优势，推动包容发展，携手应对全人类共同面临的风险和挑战，落实2030年可持续发展议程，减少全球发展不平衡，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展，让各国人民共享经济全球化和世界经济增长成果。
-- It is important for all countries to pursue inclusive development for the benefit of all. As a Chinese saying goes, "All flowers in full blossom make a beautiful spring." To lead a happy life is the common aspiration of people all over the world. Progress of the human society requires continued efforts of all countries to advance opening-up, cooperation and win-win development, instead of seclusion, confrontation and monopoly. In a world of deepening economic globalization, practices of the law of the jungle and winner-takes-all only represent a dead end. Inclusive growth for all is surely the right way forward. Countries need to rise above differences and leverage their respective strengths to pursue inclusive growth in the face of common risks and challenges. We need to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reduce the imbalances in global development, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial for all. This way, people of all countries will be able to share in the benefits of economic globalization and global growth.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
改革开放40年来，中国人民自力更生、发愤图强、砥砺前行，依靠自己的辛勤和汗水书写了国家和民族发展的壮丽史诗。同时，中国坚持打开国门搞建设，实现了从封闭半封闭到全方位开放的伟大历史转折。开放已经成为当代中国的鲜明标识。中国不断扩大对外开放，不仅发展了自己，也造福了世界。
The last four decades of reform and opening-up in China has been an epic journey for the Chinese people. With determination and through self reliance and hard work, we have forged ahead on the road to national development and progress. China has pursued development with its door open and succeeded in transforming a closed and semi-closed economy into a fully open economy. Openness has become a trademark of China. China has grown by embracing the world, and the world has also benefited from China's opening-up.
今年4月，我在博鳌亚洲论坛年会开幕式上说过，过去40年中国经济发展是在开放条件下取得的，未来中国经济实现高质量发展也必须在更加开放的条件下进行。我多次强调，中国开放的大门不会关闭，只会越开越大。中国推动更高水平开放的脚步不会停滞！中国推动建设开放型世界经济的脚步不会停滞！中国推动构建人类命运共同体的脚步不会停滞！
As I explained at the Boao Forum for Asia in April, China's economic growth over the past 40 years has been achieved with a commitment to opening-up. In the same vein, high-quality development of China's economy in the future can only be guaranteed with greater openness. I have made it clear once and again that China's door will never be closed. It will only open still wider. China will not stop its effort to pursue higher-quality opening-up! China will not stop its effort to pursue an open world economy! And China will not stop its effort to pursue a community with a shared future for mankind!
中国将坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略，实行高水平的贸易和投资自由化便利化政策，推动形成陆海内外联动、东西双向互济的开放格局。中国将始终是全球共同开放的重要推动者，中国将始终是世界经济增长的稳定动力源，中国将始终是各国拓展商机的活力大市场，中国将始终是全球治理改革的积极贡献者！
China will unswervingly follow a win-win strategy of opening-up, adopt high-quality policies to advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and move toward nationwide opening-up that coordinates the coastal and inland areas and connects the eastern and western regions. China will remain a strong advocate of openness at the global level, and will continue to act as a stable engine of global growth, a big market with enormous opportunities and an active supporter of global governance reform.
为进一步扩大开放，中国将在以下几方面加大推进力度。
To broaden its opening-up, China will step up efforts in the following aspects:
第一，激发进口潜力。中国主动扩大进口，不是权宜之计，而是面向世界、面向未来、促进共同发展的长远考量。中国将顺应国内消费升级趋势，采取更加积极有效的政策措施，促进居民收入增加、消费能力增强，培育中高端消费新增长点，持续释放国内市场潜力，扩大进口空间。中国将进一步降低关税，提升通关便利化水平，削减进口环节制度性成本，加快跨境电子商务等新业态新模式发展。中国有13亿多人口的大市场，中国真诚向各国开放市场，中国国际进口博览会不仅要年年办下去，而且要办出水平、办出成效、越办越好。
First, we will stimulate the potential for increased imports. China's initiative to expand imports is not a choice of expediency. It is a future-oriented step taken to embrace the world and promote common development. To meet the trend of consumption upgrading, we will take more proactive measures to increase people's income and spending power, foster new growth areas of medium-high-end consumption, continue to unleash the potential of the domestic market and expand the scope for imports. We will take further steps to lower tariffs, facilitate customs clearance, reduce institutional costs in import, and step up cross-border e-commerce and other new forms and models of business. China has a big market of over 1.3 billion people, and it is our sincere commitment to open the Chinese market. The CIIE, an event to be held on an annual basis, will feature good performance, good results and continued success in the years to come.
第二，持续放宽市场准入。4月份我宣布的放宽市场准入各项举措，目前已基本落地。中国已经进一步精简了外商投资准入负面清单，减少投资限制，提升投资自由化水平。中国正在稳步扩大金融业开放，持续推进服务业开放，深化农业、采矿业、制造业开放，加快电信、教育、医疗、文化等领域开放进程，特别是外国投资者关注、国内市场缺口较大的教育、医疗等领域也将放宽外资股比限制。预计未来15年，中国进口商品和服务将分别超过30万亿美元和10万亿美元。
Second, we will continue to broaden market access. The market access measures I announced in April have been basically put in place. China has shortened the negative list on foreign investment to reduce investment restrictions and promote investment liberalization. We are steadily increasing the openness of the financial sector, continuing to open up the service sector, and working toward greater openness in the agricultural, mining and manufacturing sectors. We are accelerating opening in such areas as telecommunications, education, medical service and culture. In particular, the foreign equity caps are going to be raised in the education and medical service sectors, where there is both huge interest among foreign investors and shortage in domestic supply. In the coming 15 years, China's import of goods and services are expected to exceed US$30 trillion and US$10 trillion respectively.
第三，营造国际一流营商环境。中国将加快出台外商投资法规，完善公开、透明的涉外法律体系，全面深入实施准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度。中国将尊重国际营商惯例，对在中国境内注册的各类企业一视同仁、平等对待。中国将保护外资企业合法权益，坚决依法惩处侵犯外商合法权益特别是侵犯知识产权行为，提高知识产权审查质量和审查效率，引入惩罚性赔偿制度，显著提高违法成本。营商环境只有更好，没有最好。各国都应该努力改进自己的营商环境，解决自身存在的问题，不能总是粉饰自己、指责他人，不能像手电筒那样只照他人、不照自己。
Third, we will foster a world-class business environment. China will introduce the law on foreign investment at a faster pace, and institute an open and transparent system of foreign-related laws. We will implement, across the board, the management system based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list. We respect international business rules and practice, and provide equal treatment to all types of businesses registered in China. We protect the lawful rights and interests of foreign companies, and are resolute in meting out, in a law-binding manner, punishment for violations of the lawful rights and interests of foreign investors, particularly IPR infringements. We will enhance the credibility and efficiency of IP examination, and put in place a punitive compensation system to significantly raise the cost for offenders. Improvement of the business environment is an on-going process, and there is always room for things to become better. Countries need to improve their business environment by addressing their problems. They should not just point fingers at others to gloss over their own problems. They should not hold a "flashlight" in hand doing nothing but to check out on the weakness of others and not on their own.
第四，打造对外开放新高地。中国将支持自由贸易试验区深化改革创新，持续深化差别化探索，加大压力测试，发挥自由贸易试验区改革开放试验田作用。中国将抓紧研究提出海南分步骤、分阶段建设自由贸易港政策和制度体系，加快探索建设中国特色自由贸易港进程。这是中国扩大对外开放的重大举措，将带动形成更高层次改革开放新格局。
Fourth, we will explore new horizons of opening-up. China will support its pilot free trade zones (FTZ) to deepen reform and innovation, make continued explorations based on their differentiated conditions and step up stress tests, so as to give full play to their role as a pilot ground for reform and opening-up. China will be quick to put forward policies and institutions for building a free trade port in Hainan in a step-by-step and phased manner, so as to speed up exploration of the development of free trade ports with distinct Chinese features. This is a significant move by China to open wider to the world. It will set a new model and open up new prospects for reform and opening-up at a higher level.
第五，推动多边和双边合作深入发展。中国一贯主张，坚定维护世界贸易组织规则，支持对世界贸易组织进行必要改革，共同捍卫多边贸易体制。中国愿推动早日达成区域全面经济伙伴关系协定，加快推进中欧投资协定谈判，加快中日韩自由贸易区谈判进程。中国将认真实施2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会提出的“八大行动”。中国支持二十国集团、亚太经合组织、上海合作组织、金砖国家等机制发挥更大作用，推动全球经济治理体系朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。中国将继续推进共建“一带一路”，坚持共商共建共享，同相关国家一道推进重大项目建设，搭建更多贸易促进平台，鼓励更多有实力、信誉好的中国企业到沿线国家开展投资合作，深化生态、科技、文化、民生等各领域交流合作，为全球提供开放合作的国际平台。
Fifth, we will promote international cooperation at multilateral and bilateral levels. China believes that rules of the WTO should be upheld firmly, its necessary reforms should be supported and the multilateral trading system should be defended. China will strive for the early conclusion of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), and speed up negotiations on a China-EU investment agreement and a China-Japan-ROK free trade area. China will earnestly implement the eight major initiatives announced at this year's Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC). China supports mechanisms such as the G20, APEC, the SCO (Shanghai Cooperation Organization) and BRICS in playing greater roles in building a fairer and more equitable global economic governance system. China will continue to advance the Belt and Road Initiative through international cooperation in the spirit of consultation and collaboration for shared benefits. We will work with the participating countries on major projects, set up more trade promotion platforms and encourage more well-established and capable Chinese companies to invest in countries along the routes to enhance cooperation in areas of ecology, science and technology, culture and people's livelihood. By so doing, we hope to set up for the whole world a platform for open cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当前，中国经济运行总体平稳、稳中有进。前三季度，中国国内生产总值增长6.7%，其中第三季度增长6.5%，符合预期目标。全年粮食产量可望保持在1.2万亿斤以上。城镇新增就业1107万人，提前完成全年目标。从经济增长、就业、物价、国际收支、企业利润、财政收入、劳动生产率等主要指标看，中国经济运行都处于合理区间，为实现全年目标任务打下了重要基础。同其他主要经济体相比，中国经济增长仍居世界前列。
The Chinese economy is now on the whole stable and making good progress. For the first three quarters of this year, China's GDP grew by 6.7%, including a 6.5% growth registered for the third quarter, meeting our targeted goal for growth. Grain output for the whole year is projected to surpass 1.2 trillion jin (or 600 million tons). Some 11.07 million new jobs have been created in towns and cities, hitting our annual goal ahead of schedule. Judged by the main economic indexes, from GDP growth, job creation, consumer prices and international balance of payment to companies' profit margins, government fiscal revenue and productivity, China's economy is truly performing well within the reasonable range. This has given us a solid foundation for delivering the development goals for the whole year. And, compared with other major economies, China still ranks among the world's top in terms of GDP growth.
对中国经济发展前景，大家完全可以抱着乐观态度。中国经济发展健康稳定的基本面没有改变，支撑高质量发展的生产要素条件没有改变，长期稳中向好的总体势头没有改变。中国宏观调控能力不断增强，全面深化改革不断释放发展动力。随着共建“一带一路”扎实推进，中国同“一带一路”沿线国家的投资和贸易合作加快推进。中国具有保持经济长期健康稳定发展的诸多有利条件。
So, when you talk about the future of the Chinese economy, you have every reason to be confident. The fundamentals for sound and stable growth of the Chinese economy remain unchanged. The necessary production factors for high-quality development remain unchanged. And the overall momentum of long-term stability and progress remains unchanged. China's capacity for macro-economic regulation is growing, as efforts to deepen reform across the board have unleashed new drivers of growth. With the Belt and Road Initiative being further implemented, two-way investment and trade between China and the BRI partner countries have continued to gather pace. All in all, the favorable conditions are in place for the long-term, healthy and steady growth of the Chinese economy.
当然，任何事物都有其两面，在当前国际国内经济形势下，中国经济发展也遇到了一些突出矛盾和问题，一些领域不确定性有所上升，一些企业经营困难增多，一些领域风险挑战增大。总体看，这些都是前进中遇到的问题，我们正在采取措施积极加以解决，成效已经或正在显现出来。
Of course, everything has two sides. The economic situation at home and abroad has created some significant challenges for the Chinese economy, such as more uncertainty in some sectors, more difficulties for some enterprises and growing risks in certain sectors. These challenges, generally speaking, are natural in the course of development. And we are taking active steps to solve them. Our efforts are already paying off.
中国是世界第二大经济体，有13亿多人口的大市场，有960多万平方公里的国土，中国经济是一片大海，而不是一个小池塘。大海有风平浪静之时，也有风狂雨骤之时。没有风狂雨骤，那就不是大海了。狂风骤雨可以掀翻小池塘，但不能掀翻大海。经历了无数次狂风骤雨，大海依旧在那儿！经历了5000多年的艰难困苦，中国依旧在这儿！面向未来，中国将永远在这儿！
China is the world's second largest economy. We have a market of more than 1.3 billion consumers who live on the land of over 9.6 million square kilometers. To use a metaphor, the Chinese economy is not a pond, but an ocean. The ocean may have its calm days, but big winds and storms are only to be expected. Without them, the ocean wouldn't be what it is. Big winds and storms may upset a pond, but never an ocean. Having experienced numerous winds and storms, the ocean will still be there! It is the same for China. After going through 5,000 years of trials and tribulations, China is still here! Looking ahead, China will always be here to stay!
我相信，只要我们保持战略定力，全面深化改革开放，深化供给侧结构性改革，下大气力解决存在的突出矛盾和问题，中国经济就一定能加快转入高质量发展轨道，中国人民就一定能战胜前进道路上的一切困难挑战，中国就一定能迎来更加光明的发展前景。
I am convinced that as long as we have strategic confidence, deepen reform and opening-up across the board, intensify supply-side structural reforms and make greater efforts to solve outstanding problems, then the Chinese economy will surely make a quicker transition to high-quality development, the Chinese people will surely overcome all challenges coming our way, and China will surely embrace a brighter future of development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
一座城市有一座城市的品格。上海背靠长江水，面向太平洋，长期领中国开放风气之先。上海之所以发展得这么好，同其开放品格、开放优势、开放作为紧密相连。我曾经在上海工作过，切身感受到开放之于上海、上海开放之于中国的重要性。开放、创新、包容已成为上海最鲜明的品格。这种品格是新时代中国发展进步的生动写照。
Every city has its character. Located at where the Yangtze River flows into the Pacific Ocean, Shanghai has been a pioneer of opening in China. The city's development is made possible by its character, competitive edge and steps toward greater opening. Having myself worked here, I know personally just how important it is for Shanghai to be open and for China to keep the city open. Indeed, openness, innovation and inclusiveness have become the hallmark of Shanghai. They are also a vivid reflection of China in the new era and its commitment to development and progress.
为了更好发挥上海等地区在对外开放中的重要作用，我们决定，一是将增设中国上海自由贸易试验区的新片区，鼓励和支持上海在推进投资和贸易自由化便利化方面大胆创新探索，为全国积累更多可复制可推广经验。二是将在上海证券交易所设立科创板并试点注册制，支持上海国际金融中心和科技创新中心建设，不断完善资本市场基础制度。三是将支持长江三角洲区域一体化发展并上升为国家战略，着力落实新发展理念，构建现代化经济体系，推进更高起点的深化改革和更高层次的对外开放，同“一带一路”建设、京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展、粤港澳大湾区建设相互配合，完善中国改革开放空间布局。
To capitalize on the important role of Shanghai and other areas in China's opening-up, we have made the following decisions: First, we will expand the China (Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone to include a new section, and will encourage and support bold and creative steps by Shanghai to advance investment and trade liberalization and facilitation so that more of its successful practices may be replicated in other parts of China. Second, we will launch a science and technology innovation board at the Shanghai Stock Exchange and experiment with a registration system for listed companies. We will also support Shanghai in cementing its position as an international financial center and a hub of science and innovation, and steadily improve the fundamental institutions of its capital market. Third, we will support integrated development of the Yangtze River Delta region. We will make it a national strategy and implement our new development philosophy in real earnest. We will build a modern economic system, and adopt higher standards for reform and opening-up. The region will develop in tandem with the Belt and Road Initiative, the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei coordinated development area, the Yangtze River Economic Belt and the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, and will help improve the overall layout of China's reform and opening-up.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国国际进口博览会由中国主办，世界贸易组织等多个国际组织和众多国家共同参与，不是中国的独唱，而是各国的大合唱。我希望各位嘉宾在虹桥国际经贸论坛上深入探讨全球经济治理体系改革新思路，共同维护自由贸易和多边贸易体制，共建创新包容的开放型世界经济，向着构建人类命运共同体目标不懈奋进，开创人类更加美好的未来！
The CIIE is an event hosted by China with the support of the WTO and other international organizations as well as a large number of participating countries. It is not China's solo show, but rather a chorus involving countries from around the world. I hope that at the Hongqiao International Economic and Trade Forum, you will brainstorm ideas for reforming the global economic governance system, for jointly safeguarding free trade and the multilateral trading system, and for working together to foster an open global economy that is innovative and inclusive. Together, let us contribute to our common determined efforts to build a community with a shared future and usher in an even better tomorrow for mankind!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
30. 习近平在亚洲文明对话大会开幕式上的主旨演讲
深化文明交流互鉴　共建亚洲命运共同体
Deepening Exchanges and Mutual Learning Among Civilizations For an Asian Community with a Shared Future
——在亚洲文明对话大会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2019年5月15日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations
Beijing, 15 May 2019 
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑、国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各位嘉宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
在这个草木生长的美好季节，来自亚洲47个国家和五大洲的各方嘉宾，为深化文明交流互鉴共聚一堂，共襄盛举。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对亚洲文明对话大会的召开，表示诚挚的祝贺！对各位嘉宾的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！
In this lovely season of thriving green, I am delighted to join you, distinguished guests from 47 Asian countries and five continents, in a dialogue on deepening exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations. On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I extend sincere congratulations on the opening of the Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations and a very warm welcome to all of you!
当前，世界多极化、经济全球化、文化多样化、社会信息化深入发展，人类社会充满希望。同时，国际形势的不稳定性不确定性更加突出，人类面临的全球性挑战更加严峻，需要世界各国齐心协力、共同应对。
The world today is moving toward greater multi-polarity, economic globalization and cultural diversity, and is becoming increasingly information-oriented. All this points to promising prospects for the future. Meanwhile, instability and uncertainties are mounting and the global challenges faced by humanity are becoming ever more daunting, calling for joint responses from countries around the world.
应对共同挑战、迈向美好未来，既需要经济科技力量，也需要文化文明力量。亚洲文明对话大会，为促进亚洲及世界各国文明开展平等对话、交流互鉴、相互启迪提供了一个新的平台。
To meet our common challenges and create a better future for all, we look to culture and civilization to play their role, which is as important as the role played by economy, science and technology. The Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations is convened just for this purpose, as it creates a new platform for civilizations in Asia and beyond to engage in dialogue and exchanges on an equal footing to facilitate mutual learning.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
亚洲是人类最早的定居地之一，也是人类文明的重要发祥地。亚洲地大物博、山河秀美，在世界三分之一的陆地上居住着全球三分之二的人口，47个国家、1000多个民族星罗棋布。从公元前数千年起，生活在底格里斯河－幼发拉底河、印度河－恒河、黄河－长江等流域的人们，开始耕耘灌溉、铸器造皿、建设家园。一代又一代亚洲先民历经岁月洗礼，把生产生活实践镌刻成悠久历史、积淀成深厚文明。广袤富饶的平原，碧波荡漾的水乡，辽阔壮美的草原，浩瀚无垠的沙漠，奔腾不息的江海，巍峨挺拔的山脉，承载和滋润了多彩的亚洲文明。
Asia is home to one of the earliest human settlements and an important cradle of human civilizations. This vast and beautiful continent covers a third of the earth's land mass and has two-thirds of the world's population. It has more than 1,000 ethnic groups living in 47 countries. For several thousand years before the Common Era, our forefathers living along the Tigris and the Euphrates, the Indus and the Ganges, the Yellow River and the Yangtze, tilled and irrigated the land, made tools and utensils, and built homes to live in. Generation after generation, our ancestors in Asia, with their tireless endeavors, created a time-honored history and profound and rich civilizations. Our vast and fertile plains, beautiful river basins, large steppes, immense deserts, mighty rivers and oceans, and lofty mountains have nourished and enriched diverse and colorful civilizations across Asia.
在数千年发展历程中，亚洲人民创造了辉煌的文明成果。《诗经》、《论语》、《塔木德》、《一千零一夜》、《梨俱吠陀》、《源氏物语》等名篇经典，楔形文字、地图、玻璃、阿拉伯数字、造纸术、印刷术等发明创造，长城、麦加大清真寺、泰姬陵、吴哥窟等恢宏建筑……都是人类文明的宝贵财富。各种文明在这片土地上交相辉映，谱写了亚洲文明发展史诗。
In building our civilizations over the course of several millennia, we the people of Asia have made splendid achievements. I think of literary classics such as The Book of Songs, The Analects of Confucius, The Talmud, One Thousand and One Nights, The Rigveda and Genji Monogatari; of inventions such as the cuneiform script, maps, glass, Arabic numerals, paper making and printing techniques; and of majestic structures like the Great Wall, the Great Mosque of Mecca, Taj Mahal and Angkor Wat. They are all invaluable assets of human civilization. Through interactions on this continent, Asian civilizations have enriched each other and written an epic of development.
亚洲先人们早就开始了文明交流互鉴。丝绸之路、茶叶之路、香料之路等古老商路，助推丝绸、茶叶、陶瓷、香料、绘画雕塑等风靡亚洲各国，记录着亚洲先人们交往交流、互通有无的文明对话。现在，“一带一路”、“两廊一圈”、“欧亚经济联盟”等拓展了文明交流互鉴的途径，各国在科技、教育、文化、卫生、民间交往等领域的合作蓬勃开展，亚洲文明也在自身内部及同世界文明的交流互鉴中发展壮大。
Our forefathers in Asia have long engaged in inter-civilizational exchanges and mutual learning. The ancient trade routes, notably the Silk Road, the Tea Road and the Spice Road, brought silk, tea, porcelain, spices, paintings and sculpture to all corners of Asia, and witnessed inter-civilizational dialogue in the form of trade and cultural interflow. Today, the Belt and Road Initiative, together with the Two Corridors and One Belt, the Eurasian Economic Union and other initiatives, have greatly expanded inter-civilizational exchanges and mutual learning. Cooperation among nations in science, technology, education, culture, health and people-to-people exchanges are thriving like never before. Thanks to exchanges and mutual learning among themselves and with other civilizations in the world, Asian civilizations have grown from strength to strength.
璀璨的亚洲文明，为世界文明发展史书写了浓墨重彩的篇章，人类文明因亚洲而更加绚烂多姿。从宗教到哲学、从道德到法律、从文学到绘画、从戏剧到音乐、从城市到乡村，亚洲形成了覆盖广泛的世俗礼仪、写下了传承千年的不朽巨著、留下了精湛深邃的艺术瑰宝、形成了种类多样的制度成果，为世界提供了丰富的文明选择。
The great Asian civilizations have a special place in the annals of world civilizations, and they have added to the diversity of human civilizations. Think of what Asia stands to offer in terms of religion, philosophy, ethic code, law, literature, painting, drama, music, and even the building of towns and villages. They speak volumes for Asia's proud achievements: extensive systems of social customs, immortal classics that have endured for millennia, the fine pool of exquisite art, and diverse institutions, among others. All these offer rich choices for civilizations the world over to draw on.
回顾历史、展望世界，我们应该增强文明自信，在先辈们铸就的光辉成就的基础上，坚持同世界其他文明交流互鉴，努力续写亚洲文明新辉煌。
As we review our past and look beyond Asia, we should have greater confidence in our civilizations. We may build on the rich heritage of our forefathers, stay engaged with other civilizations and increase mutual learning. By doing so, we will add new glory to Asian civilizations.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
亚洲各国山水相连、人文相亲，有着相似的历史境遇、相同的梦想追求。面向未来，我们应该把握大势、顺应潮流，努力把亚洲人民对美好生活的向往变成现实。
We Asian countries are closely connected and share a natural bond of affinity. We went through similar historical trials and hold the same dream for the future. Going forward, we need to see where the world is going, ride on the trend of the times and turn our people's longing for a better life into reality.
——亚洲人民期待一个和平安宁的亚洲。维护和平是每个国家都应该肩负起来的责任。没有和平，冲突不断甚至战火纷飞，经济增长、民生改善、社会稳定、人民往来等都会沦为空谈。亚洲各国人民希望远离恐惧，实现安居乐业、普遍安全，希望各国互尊互信、和睦相处，广泛开展跨国界、跨时空、跨文明的交往活动，共同维护比金子还珍贵的和平时光。
- We Asian people hope to see peace and stability across Asia. Upholding peace is the responsibility of every country. When peace is interrupted by conflict or war, economic growth, decent lives, social stability and people-to-people exchanges will all be out of the question. We the people of Asian countries wish to live and work in content and security free from fear. We hope that all countries will respect and trust each other, live in harmony, and interact with each other in a manner that transcends national boundaries, time and space, as well as the difference between civilizations. We should work together and jointly safeguard peace, something that is even more precious than gold.
——亚洲人民期待一个共同繁荣的亚洲。经济发展是文明存续的有力支撑，繁荣富强是国家进步的重要基石。亚洲一些民众特别是妇女儿童正忍受着贫困、饥饿、疾病的折磨，这样的局面必须改变。亚洲各国人民希望远离贫困、富足安康，希望各国合力推进开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，共同消除一些国家民众依然面临的贫穷落后，共同为孩子们创造衣食无忧的生活，让幸福和欢乐走进每一个家庭。
- We Asian people hope to see common prosperity in Asia. Economic growth sustains a civilization, and prosperity underpins the progress of a nation. In some parts of Asia, people, women and children in particular, are still suffering from poverty, hunger and disease. This must change. We Asian people long for decent lives free of poverty. We hope that countries will work together to promote economic globalization and make it more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. Doing so will enable us to eradicate poverty and backwardness that still plague people in some countries. It will make life carefree for our children and bring happiness to all families.
——亚洲人民期待一个开放融通的亚洲。亚洲近几十年快速发展，一条十分重要的经验就是敞开大门，主动融入世界经济发展潮流。如果各国重新回到一个个自我封闭的孤岛，人类文明就将因老死不相往来而丧失生机活力。亚洲各国人民希望远离封闭、融会通达，希望各国秉持开放精神，推进政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通，共同构建亚洲命运共同体、人类命运共同体。
- We Asian people hope to see an open and better-connected Asia. Asia's rapid development over the past decades shows that it is important to open one's door to the outside world and ride on the trend of global economic development. If countries choose to close their doors and hide behind them, human civilizations would be cut off from each other and lose all vitality. We Asian people hope that all countries will reject self-exclusion, embrace integration, uphold openness and promote policy, infrastructure, trade, financial and people-to-people connectivity. This way, we can jointly foster a community with a shared future for both us Asians and all humanity.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
文明因多样而交流，因交流而互鉴，因互鉴而发展。我们要加强世界上不同国家、不同民族、不同文化的交流互鉴，夯实共建亚洲命运共同体、人类命运共同体的人文基础。为此，我愿提出4点主张。
Diversity spurs interaction among civilizations, which in turn promotes mutual learning and their further development. We need to promote exchanges and mutual learning among countries, nations and cultures around the world, and strengthen popular support for jointly building a community with a shared future for both Asia and humanity as a whole. To that end, I believe it is imperative that we act in the following ways:
第一，坚持相互尊重、平等相待。每一种文明都扎根于自己的生存土壤，凝聚着一个国家、一个民族的非凡智慧和精神追求，都有自己存在的价值。人类只有肤色语言之别，文明只有姹紫嫣红之别，但绝无高低优劣之分。认为自己的人种和文明高人一等，执意改造甚至取代其他文明，在认识上是愚蠢的，在做法上是灾难性的！如果人类文明变得只有一个色调、一个模式了，那这个世界就太单调了，也太无趣了！我们应该秉持平等和尊重，摒弃傲慢和偏见，加深对自身文明和其他文明差异性的认知，推动不同文明交流对话、和谐共生。
First, we need to respect each other and treat each other as equals. All civilizations are rooted in their unique cultural environment. Each embodies the wisdom and vision of a country or nation, and each is valuable for being uniquely its own. Civilizations only vary from each other, just as human beings are different only in terms of skin color and the language used. No civilization is superior over others. The thought that one's own race and civilization are superior and the inclination to remold or replace other civilizations are just stupid. To act them out will only bring catastrophic consequences. If human civilizations are reduced to only one single color or one single model, the world would become a stereotype and too dull a place to live in. What we need is to respect each other as equals and say no to hubris and prejudice. We need to deepen understanding of the difference between one's own civilization and others', and work to promote interaction, dialogue and harmony among civilizations.
我访问过世界上许多地方，最吸引我的就是韵味不同的文明，如中亚的古城撒马尔罕、埃及的卢克索神庙、新加坡的圣淘沙、泰国的曼谷玉佛寺、希腊的雅典卫城等。中国愿同各国开展亚洲文化遗产保护行动，为更好传承文明提供必要支撑。
In the many places I have visited around the world, what fascinates me the most is civilizations in their rich diversity. I cannot but think of the Central Asian city of Samarkand, the Luxor Temple in Egypt, Sentosa in Singapore, Wat Phra Kaew in Bangkok, and the Acropolis in Athens, to mention just a few. China is ready to work with other countries to protect Asian cultural heritage and better preserve and sustain our civilizations.
第二，坚持美人之美、美美与共。每一种文明都是美的结晶，都彰显着创造之美。一切美好的事物都是相通的。人们对美好事物的向往，是任何力量都无法阻挡的！各种文明本没有冲突，只是要有欣赏所有文明之美的眼睛。我们既要让本国文明充满勃勃生机，又要为他国文明发展创造条件，让世界文明百花园群芳竞艳。
Second, we need to uphold the beauty of each civilization and the diversity of civilizations in the world. Each civilization is the crystallization of human creation, and each is beautiful in its own way. The aspiration for all that is beautiful is a common pursuit of humanity that nothing can hold back. Civilizations don't have to clash with each other; what is needed are eyes to see the beauty in all civilizations. We should keep our own civilizations dynamic and create conditions for other civilizations to flourish. Together we can make the garden of world civilizations colorful and vibrant.
文明之美集中体现在哲学、社会科学等经典著作和文学、音乐、影视剧等文艺作品之中。现在，大量外国优秀文化产品进入中国，许多中国优秀文化产品走向世界。中国愿同有关国家一道，实施亚洲经典著作互译计划和亚洲影视交流合作计划，帮助人们加深对彼此文化的理解和欣赏，为展示和传播文明之美打造交流互鉴平台。
The beauty of a civilization finds concrete expression in the classic works of philosophy and social sciences and works of literature, music, film and TV drama. Now, a large number of outstanding cultural works from other countries are brought into China, and a lot of fine Chinese cultural products are introduced to other countries. China is happy to launch initiatives with relevant countries to translate Asian classics both from and into Chinese and promote film and TV exchanges and cooperation in Asia. This will help people in Asia better understand and appreciate each other's cultures and build a platform of exchange and mutual learning for the best of Asian civilizations to spread and be known to more in the world.
第三，坚持开放包容、互学互鉴。一切生命有机体都需要新陈代谢，否则生命就会停止。文明也是一样，如果长期自我封闭，必将走向衰落。交流互鉴是文明发展的本质要求。只有同其他文明交流互鉴、取长补短，才能保持旺盛生命活力。文明交流互鉴应该是对等的、平等的，应该是多元的、多向的，而不应该是强制的、强迫的，不应该是单一的、单向的。我们应该以海纳百川的宽广胸怀打破文化交往的壁垒，以兼收并蓄的态度汲取其他文明的养分，促进亚洲文明在交流互鉴中共同前进。
Third, we need to stay open and inclusive and draw on each other's strengths. All living organisms in the human body must renew themselves through metabolism; otherwise, life would come to an end. The same is true for civilizations. Long-term self-isolation will cause a civilization to decline, while exchanges and mutual learning will sustain its development. A civilization can flourish only through exchanges and mutual learning with other civilizations. Such exchanges and mutual learning should be reciprocal, equal-footed, diversified and multi-dimensional; they should not be coercive, imposed, one-dimensional or one-way. We need to be broad-minded and strive to remove all barriers to cultural exchanges. We need to be inclusive and always seek nourishment from other civilizations to promote the common development of Asian civilizations through exchanges and mutual learning.
人是文明交流互鉴最好的载体。深化人文交流互鉴是消除隔阂和误解、促进民心相知相通的重要途径。这些年来，中国同各国一道，在教育、文化、体育、卫生等领域搭建了众多合作平台，开辟了广泛合作渠道。中国愿同各国加强青少年、民间团体、地方、媒体等各界交流，打造智库交流合作网络，创新合作模式，推动各种形式的合作走深走实，为推动文明交流互鉴创造条件。
People are the best bridge for exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations. Closer people-to-people exchanges and mutual learning, for that matter, is a sure way to eliminate estrangement and misunderstanding and promote mutual understanding among nations. Over the years, China has, in collaboration with other countries, established many platforms and channels for cooperation in education, culture, sports, health and other fields. China will work with other countries to step up exchanges among the youth, non-governmental organizations, subnational entities and media organizations, create a network of exchanges and cooperation between think tanks, explore new models of cooperation, and deliver more solid outcomes in diverse forms. Such efforts will boost exchanges and mutual learning among civilizations.
第四，坚持与时俱进、创新发展。文明永续发展，既需要薪火相传、代代守护，更需要顺时应势、推陈出新。世界文明历史揭示了一个规律：任何一种文明都要与时偕行，不断吸纳时代精华。我们应该用创新增添文明发展动力、激活文明进步的源头活水，不断创造出跨越时空、富有永恒魅力的文明成果。
Fourth, we need to advance with the times and explore new ground in development. For a civilization to endure, efforts must be made to keep it alive and build on its heritage from one generation to the next. More importantly, a civilization needs to adapt itself to the changing times and break new ground. The history of world civilizations tells us that every civilization needs to advance with the times and take in the best of its age in order to develop itself. We need to come up with new ideas to add impetus and inspiration to the development of our civilizations. With these efforts, we will deliver achievements for our civilizations to transcend time and space and have a lasting appeal.
激发人们创新创造活力，最直接的方法莫过于走入不同文明，发现别人的优长，启发自己的思维。2018年，中国国内居民出境超过1.6亿人次，入境游客超过1.4亿人次，这是促进中外文明交流互鉴的重要力量。中国愿同各国实施亚洲旅游促进计划，为促进亚洲经济发展、增进亚洲人民友谊贡献更大力量。
To spur people's innovation and creativity, the best way is to come into contact with different civilizations, see the strengths of others and draw upon them. Last year, Chinese tourists made over 160 million overseas trips and more than 140 million foreign tourists visited China. These visits played an important role in promoting exchanges and mutual learning between China and the rest of the world. In this connection, China will work with other countries to implement a plan to promote tourism in Asia. This will further boost economic development in Asia and deepen friendship among the Asian people.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中华文明是亚洲文明的重要组成部分。自古以来，中华文明在继承创新中不断发展，在应时处变中不断升华，积淀着中华民族最深沉的精神追求，是中华民族生生不息、发展壮大的丰厚滋养。中国的造纸术、火药、印刷术、指南针、天文历法、哲学思想、民本理念等在世界上影响深远，有力推动了人类文明发展进程。
Being an inseparable part of Asian civilizations, Chinese civilization has, since its early days, evolved and grown by drawing on its past achievement, exploring new ground and adapting to changes. It represents the profound pursuit of the Chinese nation and provides a rich source of strength for its lasting development. Chinese inventions such as paper making, gunpowder, printing and the compass as well as China's astronomical knowledge, calendar system, philosophy and the people-centered doctrine have all had a global impact and propelled the development of human civilizations.
中华文明是在同其他文明不断交流互鉴中形成的开放体系。从历史上的佛教东传、“伊儒会通”，到近代以来的“西学东渐”、新文化运动、马克思主义和社会主义思想传入中国，再到改革开放以来全方位对外开放，中华文明始终在兼收并蓄中历久弥新。亲仁善邻、协和万邦是中华文明一贯的处世之道，惠民利民、安民富民是中华文明鲜明的价值导向，革故鼎新、与时俱进是中华文明永恒的精神气质，道法自然、天人合一是中华文明内在的生存理念。
Chinese civilization, as an inclusive and integrated whole, has become what it is today through constant interactions with other civilizations. It has been enriched by the introduction of Buddhism and the confluence of Islam and Confucianism in the old days, and by the introduction of Western learning, the launch of the New Culture Movement and the introduction of Marxism and socialism in modern times. All-round opening-up of the country, starting with the reform and opening-up program, has added to its vitality today. For Chinese civilization, amity and good neighborliness is the principle guiding our interactions with other countries; and to deliver prosperity and security to the people is the overarching goal, to keep pace with the times through reform and innovation the abiding commitment, and to achieve harmony between man and nature the underlying philosophy.
今日之中国，不仅是中国之中国，而且是亚洲之中国、世界之中国。未来之中国，必将以更加开放的姿态拥抱世界、以更有活力的文明成就贡献世界。
China today is more than the country itself; it is very much a part of Asia and the world. In the time to come, China will open its arms wider to embrace the world and contribute the dynamic achievements of Chinese civilization to a better world in the future.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
这次亚洲文明对话大会议题广泛、内容丰富，希望大家集思广益、畅所欲言，提出真知灼见，共同创造亚洲文明和世界文明的美好未来！
The Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations has a wide-ranging agenda, and I look forward to your keen perspectives and insights. By putting our heads together, we will create an even better tomorrow for civilizations in Asia and beyond!
最后，预祝亚洲文明对话大会圆满成功！
To conclude, I wish this conference every success!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
32. 习近平在第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的主旨演讲
齐心开创共建“一带一路”美好未来
Working Together to Deliver a Brighter Future for Belt and Road Cooperation
——在第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2019年4月26日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation
Beijing, 26 April 2019 
尊敬的各位国家元首，政府首脑，
各位高级代表，
各位国际组织负责人，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellencies High-level Representatives,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends, 
上午好！“春秋多佳日，登高赋新诗。”在这个春意盎然的美好时节，我很高兴同各位嘉宾一道，共同出席第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位来宾表示热烈的欢迎！
Good morning! As a line of a classical Chinese poem goes, "Spring and autumn are lovely seasons in which friends get together to climb up mountains and write poems." On this beautiful spring day, it gives me great pleasure to have you with us here at the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation (BRF). On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I extend a very warm welcome to you all! 
两年前，我们在这里举行首届高峰论坛，规划政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通的合作蓝图。今天，来自世界各地的朋友再次聚首。我期待着同大家一起，登高望远，携手前行，共同开创共建“一带一路”的美好未来。
Two years ago, it was here that we met for the First Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, where we drew a blueprint of cooperation to enhance policy, infrastructure, trade, financial and people-to-people connectivity. Today, we are once again meeting here with you, friends from across the world. I look forward to scaling new heights with you and enhancing our partnership. Together, we will create an even brighter future for Belt and Road cooperation. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
共建“一带一路”倡议，目的是聚焦互联互通，深化务实合作，携手应对人类面临的各种风险挑战，实现互利共赢、共同发展。在各方共同努力下，“六廊六路多国多港”的互联互通架构基本形成，一大批合作项目落地生根，首届高峰论坛的各项成果顺利落实，150多个国家和国际组织同中国签署共建“一带一路”合作协议。共建“一带一路”倡议同联合国、东盟、非盟、欧盟、欧亚经济联盟等国际和地区组织的发展和合作规划对接，同各国发展战略对接。从亚欧大陆到非洲、美洲、大洋洲，共建“一带一路”为世界经济增长开辟了新空间，为国际贸易和投资搭建了新平台，为完善全球经济治理拓展了新实践，为增进各国民生福祉作出了新贡献，成为共同的机遇之路、繁荣之路。事实证明，共建“一带一路”不仅为世界各国发展提供了新机遇，也为中国开放发展开辟了新天地。
The joint pursuit of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) aims to enhance connectivity and practical cooperation. It is about jointly meeting various challenges and risks confronting mankind and delivering win-win outcomes and common development. Thanks to the joint efforts of all of us involved in this initiative, a general connectivity framework consisting of six corridors, six connectivity routes and multiple countries and ports has been put in place. A large number of cooperation projects have been launched, and the decisions of the first BRF have been smoothly implemented. More than 150 countries and international organizations have signed agreements on Belt and Road cooperation with China. The complementarity between the BRI and the development plans or cooperation initiatives of international and regional organizations such as the United Nations, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the African Union, the European Union, the Eurasian Economic Union and between the BRI and the development strategies of the participating countries has been enhanced. From the Eurasian continent to Africa, the Americas and Oceania, Belt and Road cooperation has opened up new space for global economic growth, produced new platforms for international trade and investment and offered new ways for improving global economic governance. Indeed, this initiative has helped improve people's lives in countries involved and created more opportunities for common prosperity. What we have achieved amply demonstrates that Belt and Road cooperation has both generated new opportunities for the development of all participating countries and opened up new horizon for China's development and opening-up. 
中国古人说：“万物得其本者生，百事得其道者成。”共建“一带一路”，顺应经济全球化的历史潮流，顺应全球治理体系变革的时代要求，顺应各国人民过上更好日子的强烈愿望。面向未来，我们要聚焦重点、深耕细作，共同绘制精谨细腻的“工笔画”，推动共建“一带一路”沿着高质量发展方向不断前进。
An ancient Chinese philosopher observed that "plants with strong roots grow well, and efforts with the right focus will ensure success." The Belt and Road cooperation embraces the historical trend of economic globalization, responds to the call for improving the global governance system and meets people's longing for a better life. Going ahead, we should focus on priorities and project execution, move forward with results-oriented implementation, just like an architect refining the blueprint, and jointly promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation. 
——我们要秉持共商共建共享原则，倡导多边主义，大家的事大家商量着办，推动各方各施所长、各尽所能，通过双边合作、三方合作、多边合作等各种形式，把大家的优势和潜能充分发挥出来，聚沙成塔、积水成渊。
—We need to be guided by the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. We need to act in the spirit of multilateralism, pursue cooperation through consultation and keep all participants motivated. We may, by engaging in bilateral, trilateral and multilateral cooperation, fully tap into the strengths of all participants. Just as a Chinese proverb says, "A tower is built when soil on earth accumulates, and a river is formed when streams come together." 
——我们要坚持开放、绿色、廉洁理念，不搞封闭排他的小圈子，把绿色作为底色，推动绿色基础设施建设、绿色投资、绿色金融，保护好我们赖以生存的共同家园，坚持一切合作都在阳光下运作，共同以零容忍态度打击腐败。我们发起了《廉洁丝绸之路北京倡议》，愿同各方共建风清气正的丝绸之路。
—We need to pursue open, green and clean cooperation. The Belt and Road is not an exclusive club; it aims to promote green development. We may launch green infrastructure projects, make green investment and provide green financing to protect the Earth which we all call home. In pursuing Belt and Road cooperation, everything should be done in a transparent way, and we should have zero tolerance for corruption. The Beijing Initiative for Clean Silk Road has been launched, which represents our strong commitment to transparency and clean governance in pursuing Belt and Road cooperation. 
——我们要努力实现高标准、惠民生、可持续目标，引入各方普遍支持的规则标准，推动企业在项目建设、运营、采购、招投标等环节按照普遍接受的国际规则标准进行，同时要尊重各国法律法规。要坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，聚焦消除贫困、增加就业、改善民生，让共建“一带一路”成果更好惠及全体人民，为当地经济社会发展作出实实在在的贡献，同时确保商业和财政上的可持续性，做到善始善终、善作善成。
—We need to pursue high standard cooperation to improve people's lives and promote sustainable development. We will adopt widely accepted rules and standards and encourage participating companies to follow general international rules and standards in project development, operation, procurement and tendering and bidding. The laws and regulations of participating countries should also be respected. We need to take a people-centered approach, give priority to poverty alleviation and job creation to see that the joint pursuit of Belt and Road cooperation will deliver true benefits to the people of participating countries and contribute to their social and economic development. We also need to ensure the commercial and fiscal sustainability of all projects so that they will achieve the intended goals as planned. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 共建“一带一路”，关键是互联互通。我们应该构建全球互联互通伙伴关系，实现共同发展繁荣。我相信，只要大家齐心协力、守望相助，即使相隔万水千山，也一定能够走出一条互利共赢的康庄大道。
Connectivity is vital to advancing Belt and Road cooperation. We need to promote a global partnership of connectivity to achieve common development and prosperity. I am confident that as we work closely together, we will transcend geographical distance and embark on a path of win-win cooperation. 
基础设施是互联互通的基石，也是许多国家发展面临的瓶颈。建设高质量、可持续、抗风险、价格合理、包容可及的基础设施，有利于各国充分发挥资源禀赋，更好融入全球供应链、产业链、价值链，实现联动发展。中国将同各方继续努力，构建以新亚欧大陆桥等经济走廊为引领，以中欧班列、陆海新通道等大通道和信息高速路为骨架，以铁路、港口、管网等为依托的互联互通网络。我们将继续发挥共建“一带一路”专项贷款、丝路基金、各类专项投资基金的作用，发展丝路主题债券，支持多边开发融资合作中心有效运作。我们欢迎多边和各国金融机构参与共建“一带一路”投融资，鼓励开展第三方市场合作，通过多方参与实现共同受益的目标。
Infrastructure is the bedrock of connectivity, while the lack of infrastructure has held up the development of many countries. High-quality, sustainable, resilient, affordable, inclusive and accessible infrastructure projects can help countries fully leverage their resource endowment, better integrate into the global supply, industrial and value chains, and realize inter-connected development. To this end, China will continue to work with other parties to build a connectivity network centering on economic corridors such as the New Eurasian Land Bridge, supplemented by major transportation routes like the China-Europe Railway Express and the New International Land-Sea Trade Corridor and information expressway, and reinforced by major railway, port and pipeline projects. We will continue to make good use of the Belt and Road Special Lending Scheme, the Silk Road Fund, and various special investment funds, develop Silk Road theme bonds, and support the Multilateral Cooperation Center for Development Finance in its operation. We welcome the participation of multilateral and national financial institutions in BRI investment and financing and encourage third-market cooperation. With the involvement of multiple stakeholders, we can surely deliver benefits to all. 
商品、资金、技术、人员流通，可以为经济增长提供强劲动力和广阔空间。“河海不择细流，故能就其深。”如果人为阻断江河的流入，再大的海，迟早都有干涸的一天。我们要促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。我们将同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，加强海关、税收、审计监管等领域合作，建立共建“一带一路”税收征管合作机制，加快推广“经认证的经营者”国际互认合作。我们还制定了《“一带一路”融资指导原则》，发布了《“一带一路”债务可持续性分析框架》，为共建“一带一路”融资合作提供指南。中方今年将举办第二届中国国际进口博览会，为各方进入中国市场搭建更广阔平台。
The flow of goods, capital, technology and people will power economic growth and create broad space for it. As a Chinese saying goes, "The ceaseless inflow of rivers makes the ocean deep." However, were such inflow to be cut, the ocean, however big, would eventually dry up. We need to promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, say no to protectionism, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. To this end, we will enter into negotiation with more countries to conclude high-standard free trade agreements, and strengthen cooperation in customs, taxation and audit oversight by setting up the Belt and Road Initiative Tax Administration Cooperation Mechanism and accelerating international collaboration on the mutual recognition of Authorized Economic Operators. We have also formulated the Guiding Principles on Financing the Development of the Belt and Road and published the Debt Sustainability Framework for Participating Countries of the Belt and Road Initiative to provide guidance for BRI financing cooperation. In addition, the Second China International Import Expo will be held this year to build an even bigger platform for other parties to access the Chinese market. 
创新就是生产力，企业赖之以强，国家赖之以盛。我们要顺应第四次工业革命发展趋势，共同把握数字化、网络化、智能化发展机遇，共同探索新技术、新业态、新模式，探寻新的增长动能和发展路径，建设数字丝绸之路、创新丝绸之路。中国将继续实施共建“一带一路”科技创新行动计划，同各方一道推进科技人文交流、共建联合实验室、科技园区合作、技术转移四大举措。我们将积极实施创新人才交流项目，未来5年支持5000人次中外方创新人才开展交流、培训、合作研究。我们还将支持各国企业合作推进信息通信基础设施建设，提升网络互联互通水平。
Innovation boosts productivity; it makes companies competitive and countries strong. We need to keep up with the trend of the Fourth Industrial Revolution, jointly seize opportunities created by digital, networked and smart development, explore new technologies and new forms and models of business, foster new growth drivers and explore new development pathways, and build the digital Silk Road and the Silk Road of innovation. China will continue to carry out the Belt and Road Science, Technology and Innovation Cooperation Action Plan, and will work with our partners to pursue four major initiatives, namely the Science and Technology People-to-People Exchange Initiative, the Joint Laboratory Initiative, the Science Park Cooperation Initiative, and the Technology Transfer Initiative. We will actively implement the Belt and Road Initiative Talents Exchange Program, and will, in the coming five years, offer 5,000 opportunities for exchange, training and cooperative research for talents from China and other BRI participating countries. We will also support companies of various countries in jointly advancing ICT infrastructure building to upgrade cyber connectivity. 
发展不平衡是当今世界最大的不平衡。在共建“一带一路”过程中，要始终从发展的视角看问题，将可持续发展理念融入项目选择、实施、管理的方方面面。我们要致力于加强国际发展合作，为发展中国家营造更多发展机遇和空间，帮助他们摆脱贫困，实现可持续发展。为此，我们同各方共建“一带一路”可持续城市联盟、绿色发展国际联盟，制定《“一带一路”绿色投资原则》，发起“关爱儿童、共享发展，促进可持续发展目标实现”合作倡议。我们启动共建“一带一路”生态环保大数据服务平台，将继续实施绿色丝路使者计划，并同有关国家一道，实施“一带一路”应对气候变化南南合作计划。我们还将深化农业、卫生、减灾、水资源等领域合作，同联合国在发展领域加强合作，努力缩小发展差距。
Imbalance in development is the greatest imbalance confronting today's world. In the joint pursuit of the BRI, we must always take a development-oriented approach and see that the vision of sustainable development underpins project selection, implementation and management. We need to strengthen international development cooperation so as to create more opportunities for developing countries, help them eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development. In this connection, China and its partners have set up the Belt and Road Sustainable Cities Alliance and the BRI International Green Development Coalition, formulated the Green Investment Principles for the Belt and Road Development, and launched the Declaration on Accelerating the Sustainable Development Goals for Children through Shared Development. We have set up the BRI Environmental Big Data Platform. We will continue to implement the Green Silk Road Envoys Program and work with relevant countries to jointly implement the Belt and Road South-South Cooperation Initiative on Climate Change. We will also deepen cooperation in agriculture, health, disaster mitigation and water resources; and we will enhance development cooperation with the United Nations to narrow the gap in development. 
我们要积极架设不同文明互学互鉴的桥梁，深入开展教育、科学、文化、体育、旅游、卫生、考古等各领域人文合作，加强议会、政党、民间组织往来，密切妇女、青年、残疾人等群体交流，形成多元互动的人文交流格局。未来5年，中国将邀请共建“一带一路”国家的政党、智库、民间组织等1万名代表来华交流。我们将鼓励和支持沿线国家社会组织广泛开展民生合作，联合开展一系列环保、反腐败等领域培训项目，深化各领域人力资源开发合作。我们将持续实施“丝绸之路”中国政府奖学金项目，举办“一带一路”青年创意与遗产论坛、青年学生“汉语桥”夏令营等活动。我们还将设立共建“一带一路”国际智库合作委员会、新闻合作联盟等机制，汇聚各方智慧和力量。
We need to build bridges for exchanges and mutual learning among different cultures, deepen cooperation in education, science, culture, sports, tourism, health and archaeology, strengthen exchanges between parliaments, political parties and non-governmental organizations and exchanges between women, young people and people with disabilities in order to facilitate multi-faceted people-to-people exchanges. To this end, we will, in the coming five years, invite 10,000 representatives of political parties, think tanks and non-governmental organizations from Belt and Road participating countries to visit China. We will encourage and support extensive cooperation on livelihood projects among social organizations of participating countries, conduct a number of environmental protection and anti-corruption training courses and deepen human resources development cooperation in various areas. We will continue to run the Chinese government scholarship Silk Road Program, host the International Youth Forum on Creativity and Heritage along the Silk Roads and the "Chinese Bridge" summer camps. We will also put in place new mechanisms such as the Belt and Road Studies Network and the Belt and Road News Alliance to draw inspiration and pool our strength for greater synergy. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。70年前，中国人民历经几代人上下求索，终于在中国共产党领导下建立了新中国，中国人民从此站了起来，中国人民的命运从此掌握在了自己手中。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. Seven decades ago, through the arduous struggle carried out by several generations of Chinese people and under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, New China was founded. We Chinese have since stood up and held our future in our own hands. 
历经70年艰苦奋斗，中国人民立足本国国情，在实践中不断探索前进方向，开辟了中国特色社会主义道路。今天的中国，已经站在新的历史起点上。我们深知，尽管成就辉煌，但前方还有一座座山峰需要翻越，还有一个个险滩等待跋涉。我们将继续沿着中国特色社会主义道路大步向前，坚持全面深化改革，坚持高质量发展，坚持扩大对外开放，坚持走和平发展道路，推动构建人类命运共同体。
Over the past seven decades, we in China have, based on its realities, constantly explored the way forward through practices, and have succeeded in following the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. Today, China has reached a new historical starting point. However, we are keenly aware that with all we have achieved, there are still many mountains to scale and many shoals to navigate. We will continue to advance along the path of socialism with Chinese characteristics, deepen sweeping reforms, pursue quality development, and expand opening-up. We remain committed to peaceful development and will endeavor to build a community with a shared future for mankind. 
下一步，中国将采取一系列重大改革开放举措，加强制度性、结构性安排，促进更高水平对外开放。
Going forward, China will take a series of major reform and opening-up measures and make stronger institutional and structural moves to boost higher quality opening-up. 
第一，更广领域扩大外资市场准入。公平竞争能够提高效率、带来繁荣。中国已实施准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理模式，未来将继续大幅缩减负面清单，推动现代服务业、制造业、农业全方位对外开放，并在更多领域允许外资控股或独资经营。我们将新布局一批自由贸易试验区，加快探索建设自由贸易港。我们将加快制定配套法规，确保严格实施《外商投资法》。我们将以公平竞争、开放合作推动国内供给侧结构性改革，有效淘汰落后和过剩产能，提高供给体系质量和效率。
First, we will expand market access for foreign investment in more areas. Fair competition boosts business performance and creates prosperity. China has already adopted a management model based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list, and will continue to significantly shorten the negative list. We will work for the all-round opening-up of modern services, manufacturing and agriculture, and will allow the operation of foreign-controlled or wholly foreign-owned businesses in more sectors. We will plan new pilot free trade zones and explore at a faster pace the opening of a free trade port. We will accelerate the adoption of supporting regulations to ensure full implementation of the Foreign Investment Law. We will promote supply-side structural reform through fair competition and open cooperation, and will phase out backward and excessive production capacity in an effective way to improve the quality and efficiency of supply. 
第二，更大力度加强知识产权保护国际合作。没有创新就没有进步。加强知识产权保护，不仅是维护内外资企业合法权益的需要，更是推进创新型国家建设、推动高质量发展的内在要求。中国将着力营造尊重知识价值的营商环境，全面完善知识产权保护法律体系，大力强化执法，加强对外国知识产权人合法权益的保护，杜绝强制技术转让，完善商业秘密保护，依法严厉打击知识产权侵权行为。中国愿同世界各国加强知识产权保护合作，创造良好创新生态环境，推动同各国在市场化法治化原则基础上开展技术交流合作。
Second, we will intensify efforts to enhance international cooperation in intellectual property protection. Without innovation, there will be no progress. Full intellectual property protection will not only ensure the lawful rights and interests of Chinese and foreign companies; it is also crucial to promoting China's innovation-driven and quality development. China will spare no effort to foster a business environment that respects the value of knowledge. We will fully improve the legal framework for protecting intellectual property, step up law enforcement, enhance protection of the lawful rights and interests of foreign intellectual property owners, stop forced technology transfer, improve protection of trade secrets, and crack down hard on violations of intellectual property in accordance with law. China will strengthen cooperation with other countries in intellectual property protection, create an enabling environment for innovation and promote technological exchanges and cooperation with other countries on the basis of market principles and the rule of law. 
第三，更大规模增加商品和服务进口。中国既是“世界工厂”，也是“世界市场”。中国有世界上规模最大、成长最快的中等收入群体，消费增长潜力巨大。为满足人民日益增长的物质文化生活需要，增加消费者选择和福利，我们将进一步降低关税水平，消除各种非关税壁垒，不断开大中国市场大门，欢迎来自世界各国的高质量产品。我们不刻意追求贸易顺差，愿意进口更多国外有竞争力的优质农产品、制成品和服务，促进贸易平衡发展。
Third, we will increase the import of goods and services on an even larger scale. China is both a global factory and a global market. With the world's largest and fastest growing middle-income population, China has a vast potential for increasing consumption. To meet our people's ever-growing material and cultural needs and give our consumers more choices and benefits, we will further lower tariffs and remove various non-tariff barriers. We will steadily open China's market wider to quality products from across the world. China does not seek trade surplus; we want to import more competitive quality agricultural products, manufactured goods and services to promote balanced trade. 
第四，更加有效实施国际宏观经济政策协调。全球化的经济需要全球化的治理。中国将加强同世界各主要经济体的宏观政策协调，努力创造正面外溢效应，共同促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。中国不搞以邻为壑的汇率贬值，将不断完善人民币汇率形成机制，使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，保持人民币汇率在合理均衡水平上的基本稳定，促进世界经济稳定。规则和信用是国际治理体系有效运转的基石，也是国际经贸关系发展的前提。中国积极支持和参与世贸组织改革，共同构建更高水平的国际经贸规则。
Fourth, we will more effectively engage in international macro-economic policy coordination. A globalized economy calls for global governance. China will strengthen macro policy coordination with other major economies to generate a positive spillover and jointly contribute to robust, sustainable, balanced and inclusive global growth. China will not resort to the beggar-thy-neighbor practice of RMB devaluation. On the contrary, we will continue to improve the exchange rate regime, see that the market plays a decisive role in resource allocation and keep the RMB exchange rate basically stable at an adaptive and equilibrium level. These steps will help ensure the steady growth of the global economy. Rules and credibility underpin the effective functioning of the international governance system; they are the prerequisite for growing international economic and trade relations. China is an active supporter and participant of WTO reform and will work with others to develop international economic and trade rules of higher standards. 
第五，更加重视对外开放政策贯彻落实。中国人历来讲求“一诺千金”。我们高度重视履行同各国达成的多边和双边经贸协议，加强法治政府、诚信政府建设，建立有约束的国际协议履约执行机制，按照扩大开放的需要修改完善法律法规，在行政许可、市场监管等方面规范各级政府行为，清理废除妨碍公平竞争、扭曲市场的不合理规定、补贴和做法，公平对待所有企业和经营者，完善市场化、法治化、便利化的营商环境。
Fifth, we will work harder to ensure the implementation of opening-up related policies. We Chinese have a saying that honoring a promise carries the weight of gold. We are committed to implementing multilateral and bilateral economic and trade agreements reached with other countries. We will strengthen the building of a government based on the rule of law and good faith. A binding mechanism for honoring international agreements will be put in place. Laws and regulations will be revised and improved in keeping with the need to expand opening-up. We will see that governments at all levels operate in a well-regulated way when it comes to issuing administrative licenses and conducting market oversight. We will overhaul and abolish unjustified regulations, subsidies and practices that impede fair competition and distort the market. We will treat all enterprises and business entities equally, and foster an enabling business environment based on market operation and governed by law. 
中国扩大开放的举措，是根据中国改革发展客观需要作出的自主选择，这有利于推动经济高质量发展，有利于满足人民对美好生活的向往，有利于世界和平、稳定、发展。我们也希望世界各国创造良好投资环境，平等对待中国企业、留学生和学者，为他们正常开展国际交流合作活动提供公平友善的环境。我们坚信，一个更加开放的中国，将同世界形成更加良性的互动，带来更加进步和繁荣的中国和世界。
These measures to expand opening-up are a choice China has made by itself to advance its reform and development. It will promote high-quality economic development, meet the people's desire for a better life, and contribute to world peace, stability and development. We hope that other countries will also create an enabling environment of investment, treat Chinese enterprises, students and scholars as equals, and provide a fair and friendly environment for them to engage in international exchanges and cooperation. We are convinced that a more open China will further integrate itself into the world and deliver greater progress and prosperity for both China and the world at large. 
同事们、朋友们！
Dear Colleagues and Friends, 
让我们携起手来，一起播撒合作的种子，共同收获发展的果实，让各国人民更加幸福，让世界更加美好！
Let us join hands to sow the seeds of cooperation, harvest the fruits of development, bring greater happiness to our people and make our world a better place for all! 
祝本次高峰论坛圆满成功！
In conclusion, I wish the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation a full success! 
谢谢大家。
Thank you!
22. 习近平在第二届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
开放合作　命运与共
Openness and Cooperation for a Shared Future
——在第二届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2019年11月5日，上海）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the Second China International Import Expo
Shanghai, 5 November 2019 
尊敬的马克龙总统，
尊敬的霍尔尼斯总理，
尊敬的米佐塔基斯总理，
尊敬的布尔纳比奇总理，
尊敬的各位议长，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各代表团团长，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellency President Emmanuel Macron,
Your Excellencies Prime Minister Andrew Holness, Prime Minister
Kyriakos Mitsotakis, and Prime Minister Ana Brnabić,
Your Excellencies Speakers of Parliament,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Your Excellencies Heads of Delegations,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
在这多彩的深秋时节，很高兴同大家相聚在黄浦江畔。现在，我宣布，第二届中国国际进口博览会正式开幕！
In this lovely season tinted with deep autumn hues, it gives me great pleasure to get together with you by the Huangpu River. I now declare open the second China International Import Expo!
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对远道而来的各位嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！向来自世界各地的新老朋友们，致以诚挚的问候和良好的祝愿！
At the outset, on behalf of the Chinese government and people as well as in my own name, a hearty welcome to all the distinguished guests from afar! To the many old and new friends gathered here from across the world, I give you my warm greetings and best wishes!
一年前，我们在这里成功举办了首届中国国际进口博览会。今天，更多朋友如约而至。本届中国国际进口博览会延续“新时代，共享未来”的主题。我相信，各位朋友都能乘兴而来、满意而归！
A year ago in this same place, the inaugural China International Import Expo was successfully held. Today, we are happy to be joined by even more friends in the second Expo that carries on the theme of “New Era, Shared Future”. I trust that you will all find your participation in the event worthwhile and rewarding!
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
去年，我在首届进博会上宣布了中国扩大对外开放的5方面举措，对上海提出了3点进一步开放的要求。一年来，这些开放措施已经基本落实。其中，上海自由贸易试验区临港新片区已经正式设立，我们推而广之，还在其他省份新设了6个自由贸易试验区；再就是上海证券交易所设立科创板并试点注册制已经正式实施；长三角区域一体化发展已经作为国家战略正式实施；这两年来，中国的国家战略又迈出新的步伐，粤港澳大湾区战略、京津冀一体化战略、长江经济带战略、黄河流域生态保护和高质量发展战略、东北振兴战略、西部开发战略，今年又明确了长三角发展的新战略。《外商投资法》将于明年1月1日起实行；全面实施准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度已经出台；扩大进口促进消费、进一步降低关税等取得重大进展。去年，我在进博会期间举行的双边活动中同有关国家达成98项合作事项，现在清点一下，其中23项已经办结，47项正在积极推进，28项也在跟进推进。
At last year’s Expo, I announced the initiatives China was to take in the five areas of further opening-up and spelt out three specific steps for Shanghai to open wider to the world. One year on, these initiatives and steps have been by and large put in place. The Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone now has a Lingang special area, and six other new pilot free trade zones have been set up in other provinces of the country. The Shanghai Stock Exchange launched a sci-tech innovation board, with a registration system being piloted for the listing of companies. In the Yangtze River Delta area, a plan for integrated development of the region has been introduced as a national strategy. At the national level, a Foreign Investment Law will enter into force on 1 January next year. A management system combining pre-establishment national treatment and the negative list has been effected nationwide. Major progress is being made in increasing imports to boost consumption and in bringing down the tariff level. For last year’s Expo, during my bilateral events with foreign leaders, 98 initiatives were agreed upon, of which 23 have now been completed, 47 are making good progress, and 28 are on track of steady implementation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
经济全球化是历史潮流。长江、尼罗河、亚马逊河、多瑙河昼夜不息、奔腾向前，尽管有时会出现一些回头浪，尽管也会遇到许多险滩暗礁，但大江大河奔腾向前的势头，这是谁也阻挡不了的。
Economic globalization represents the trend of history. Like the world’s great rivers, the Yangtze, the Nile, the Amazon and the Danube — they all surge forward in relentless flow, and nothing can stop their mighty movement, not the current of undertows or hidden shoals or rocks beneath the water.
世界经济发展面临的难题，没有哪一个国家能独自解决。各国应该坚持人类优先的理念，而不应把一己之利凌驾于人类利益之上。我们要以更加开放的心态和举措，共同把全球市场的蛋糕做大、把全球共享的机制做实、把全球合作的方式做活，共同把经济全球化动力搞得越大越好、阻力搞得越小越好。
Of the problems confronting the world economy, none can be resolved by a single country alone. We must all put the common good of humanity first rather than place one’s own interest above the common interest of all. We must have a more open mindset and take more open steps, and work together to make the pie of the global market even bigger. We need to strengthen the mechanisms for sharing benefits globally, and explore new ways of international cooperation. The goal is to give more impetus to economic globalization and remove impediments as much as we could.
为此，我愿提出以下几点倡议。
For that to happen, I want to propose the following:
第一，共建开放合作的世界经济。当今世界，全球价值链、供应链深入发展，你中有我、我中有你，各国经济融合是大势所趋。距离近了，交往多了，难免会有磕磕碰碰。面对矛盾和摩擦，协商合作才是正道。只要平等相待、互谅互让，就没有破解不了的难题。我们应该坚持以开放求发展，深化交流合作，坚持“拉手”而不是“松手”，坚持“拆墙”而不是“筑墙”，坚决反对保护主义、单边主义，不断削减贸易壁垒，推动全球价值链、供应链更加完善，共同培育市场需求。
First, let us work together to build an open world economy through cooperation. As global value and supply chains continue to develop, countries are inter-connected with each other, and integration of their economy is the order of the day. Distances between countries are getting shorter, and interactions among countries are growing, hence the probability of differences and frictions. The right solution lies in consultation and cooperation. All problems could be settled in the spirit of equality, mutual understanding and accommodation. We need to promote development through opening-up and deepen exchanges and cooperation among us. We need to “join hands” with each other instead of “letting go” of each other’s hands. We need to “tear down walls”, not to “erect walls”. We need to stand firm against protectionism and unilateralism. We need to continually bring down trade barriers, optimize global value and supply chains, and jointly foster market demand.
第二，共建开放创新的世界经济。创新发展是引领世界经济持续发展的必然选择。当前，新一轮科技革命和产业变革正处在实现重大突破的历史关口。各国应该加强创新合作，推动科技同经济深度融合，加强创新成果共享，努力打破制约知识、技术、人才等创新要素流动的壁垒，支持企业自主开展技术交流合作，让创新源泉充分涌流。为了更好运用知识的创造以造福人类，我们应该共同加强知识产权保护，而不是搞知识封锁，制造甚至扩大科技鸿沟。
Second, let us work together to build an open world economy with innovation. Innovation-driven development is essential to sustained growth of the world economy. What we are seeing is a new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation. It has reached a historic juncture when major breakthroughs are within sight. Countries need to step up cooperation in innovation. We need to facilitate integration of science and technology with economic growth, and increase the sharing of innovation results. We need to remove barriers that hamper the flow of knowledge, technology, talents and other factors of innovation, and support our businesses in technical exchanges and cooperation on their own accord. This is a way to unleash the potential for innovation. And, to benefit mankind with the better use of knowledge, we need to tighten the protection of intellectual property. The least desirable is for us to stifle the flow of knowledge, or to create or even widen the technology divide among us.
第三，共建开放共享的世界经济。我们应该谋求包容互惠的发展前景，共同维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际秩序，坚持多边贸易体制的核心价值和基本原则，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。我们应该落实《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》，加大对最不发达国家支持力度，让发展成果惠及更多国家和民众。
Third, let us work together to build an open world economy for mutual benefits. We need to work toward the vision of inclusive and mutually beneficial development. We need to work together to safeguard the international order underpinned by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, uphold the core values and basic principles of the multilateral trading system, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced, and beneficial to all. We need to work in real earnest to implement the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and increase support for the Least Developed Countries so that the benefits of development will reach more countries and peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
站在新的历史起点，中国开放的大门只会越开越大。中国共产党刚刚举行了十九届四中全会，制定了关于坚持和完善中国特色社会主义制度、推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化若干重大问题的决定，其中包括很多深化改革、扩大开放的重要举措。我们将坚持对外开放的基本国策，坚持以开放促改革、促发展、促创新，持续推进更高水平的对外开放。
Standing at a new historical starting point, China will open its door only wider to the world. The Communist Party of China has just concluded the fourth plenary session of the 19th Central Committee. A decision has been made to further uphold and improve the socialist system with Chinese characteristics and to modernize the country’s system and capacity for governance. That included a host of significant measures to deepen reform and opening-up. China will adhere to its fundamental state policy of opening-up and stay committed to opening-up to promote reform, development and innovation. This will bring about opening-up at an even higher level.
第一，继续扩大市场开放。中国有近14亿人口，中等收入群体规模全球最大，市场规模巨大、潜力巨大，前景不可限量。中国老百姓有一句话，叫作“世界那么大，我想去看看”。在这里我要说，中国市场这么大，欢迎大家都来看看。中国将增强国内消费对经济发展的基础性作用，积极建设更加活跃的国内市场，为中国经济发展提供支撑，为世界经济增长扩大空间。中国将更加重视进口的作用，进一步降低关税和制度性成本，培育一批进口贸易促进创新示范区，扩大对各国高质量产品和服务的进口。中国将推动进口和出口、货物贸易和服务贸易、双边贸易和双向投资、贸易和产业协调发展，促进国际国内要素有序自由流动、资源高效配置、市场深度融合。
First, China will continue to open up its market. China has a population of 1.4 billion. Its middle-income population is the biggest in the world. The huge Chinese market points to a potential that is simply unlimited. The Chinese people often say, “The world is a big place, and I want to see just more of it.” What I want to say to you today is that the Chinese market is such a big one that you should all come and see what it has to offer. China will better leverage the fundamental role of domestic consumption in economic development and foster a more robust domestic market to boost growth at home and create more room for global growth. China will give greater importance to import. We will continue to lower tariffs and institutional transaction costs, develop demonstration zones to promote import trade by creative means, and import more high-quality goods and services from around the world. We will take steps to promote balanced development of both imports and exports, of trade in goods and services, of two-way trade and investment, and of trade and industry. This way, we will ensure a free yet orderly flow of both international and domestic factors of production, improve the efficient allocation of resources, and deepen integration of markets.
第二，继续完善开放格局。中国对外开放是全方位、全领域的，正在加快推动形成全面开放新格局。中国将继续鼓励自由贸易试验区大胆试、大胆闯，加快推进海南自由贸易港建设，就是我们的海南省，全省建成自由贸易港。打造开放新高地。中国将继续推动京津冀协同发展、长江经济带发展、长三角区域一体化发展、粤港澳大湾区建设，并将制定黄河流域生态保护和高质量发展新的国家战略，增强开放联动效应。中国有两大母亲河，一个叫长江，一个叫黄河。我们将在两河流域进一步科学布局。
Second, China will continue to optimize its opening-up structure. China’s opening-up is all-dimensional and all-sectoral. A new structure of all-out opening-up is quick in the making. China will continue to encourage bold trials and experiments in pilot free trade zones and quicken the development of the Hainan Free Trade Port as pacesetters of opening-up in China. China will continue to implement integrated regional development strategies for the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, the Yangtze River Economic Belt, the Yangtze River Delta region, and the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, and draw up a new national strategy for environmental protection and high-quality development in the Yellow River basin. The purpose is to seek greater synergy of opening-up among different parts of the country.
第三，继续优化营商环境。营商环境是企业生存发展的土壤。今年10月24日，世界银行发表《2020营商环境报告》，中国营商环境排名由46位上升到31位，提升15位。上个月，中国公布了《优化营商环境条例》。今后，中国将继续针对制约经济发展的突出矛盾，在关键环节和重要领域加快改革步伐，以国家治理体系和治理能力现代化为高水平开放、高质量发展提供制度保障。中国将不断完善市场化、法治化、国际化的营商环境，放宽外资市场准入，继续缩减负面清单，完善投资促进和保护、信息报告等制度。中国将营造尊重知识价值的环境，完善知识产权保护法律体系，大力强化相关执法，增强知识产权民事和刑事司法保护力度。
Third, China will continue to improve the business environment. Proper business environment provides the necessary condition for enterprises to survive and thrive. On 24 October, the World Bank released its Doing Business Report 2020, which ranks China 31st, up by15 places from last year’s ranking of 46th. Last month, China issued a regulation on optimizing the business environment. Going forward, China will continue to remove major constraints on economic development, gear up reforms regarding key links and areas, and modernize the system and capacity for governance as an institutional support for high-standard opening-up and high-quality development. China will continue to foster an enabling business environment that is based on market principles, governed by law, and up to international standards. We will give foreign investments greater market access to more sectors, shorten the negative list further, and improve institutions for investment promotion and protection and for information reporting. With regard to IP protection, we will cultivate an environment that appreciates the value of knowledge, improve the legal framework, step up law enforcement, and enhance protection through both civil and criminal justice systems.
第四，继续深化多双边合作。中国是国际合作的倡导者和多边主义的支持者。中国支持对世界贸易组织进行必要改革，让世界贸易组织在扩大开放、促进发展方面发挥更大作用，增强多边贸易体制的权威性和有效性。今天下午，中方将主办世贸组织小型部长会议。我们期待各方坦诚交换意见，共同采取行动，为完善全球经济治理贡献正能量。我高兴地得知，昨天区域全面经济伙伴关系协定15个成员国已经整体上结束谈判，希望协定能够早日签署生效。中国愿同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，加快中欧投资协定、中日韩自由贸易协定、中国－海合会自由贸易协定谈判进程。中国将积极参与联合国、二十国集团、亚太经合组织、金砖国家等机制合作，共同推动经济全球化向前发展。
Fourth, China will continue to deepen multilateral and bilateral cooperation. China is a champion for international cooperation and a supporter of multilateralism. China supports necessary reforms to the
WTO so that the organization can play a bigger role in promoting openness and development and the multilateral trading regime can be more authoritative and effective. Later this afternoon, the Chinese side will host an Informal WTO Ministerial Meeting. We look forward to candid exchanges that will lead to joint actions to improve global economic governance. I am happy to note that yesterday, 15 countries taking part in the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) concluded text-based negotiations, and I hope the agreement will be signed and enter into force at an early date. China will be happy to conclude high-standard free trade agreements with more countries. We will speed up negotiations on a China-EU investment agreement, a China-Japan-ROK FTA, and a China-Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) FTA. We will stay actively engaged in cooperation within the United Nations, the G20, APEC, and BRICS to move economic globalization forward.
第五，继续推进共建“一带一路”。目前，中国已经同137个国家和30个国际组织签署197份共建“一带一路”合作文件。中国将秉持共商共建共享原则，坚持开放、绿色、廉洁理念，努力实现高标准、惠民生、可持续目标，推动共建“一带一路”高质量发展。
Fifth, China will continue to advance Belt and Road cooperation. To date, China has signed 197 documents on Belt and Road cooperation with 137 countries and 30 international organizations. China will follow the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution, and shared benefits, the philosophy of open, green, and clean cooperation, and a high-standard, people-centered, and sustainable approach to promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
面向未来，中国将坚持新发展理念，继续实施创新驱动发展战略，着力培育和壮大新动能，不断推动转方式、调结构、增动力，推动经济高质量发展，为世界经济增长带来新的更多机遇。
Looking forward, China will follow the new development approach and the strategy of innovation-driven development, and redouble our efforts to foster new growth drivers by shifting the growth model, improving the economic structure, and creating new growth momentum. We believe such efforts will not only bring China high-quality development but also new growth opportunities for the global economy.
我相信，中国经济发展前景一定会更加光明，也必然更加光明。从历史的长镜头来看，中国发展是属于全人类进步的伟大事业。中国将张开双臂，为各国提供更多市场机遇、投资机遇、增长机遇，实现共同发展。
I have faith in the bright prospects of China’s economic development. China’s development, viewed through the lens of history, is an integral part of the lofty cause of human progress. China will reach out its arms and offer countries in the world more opportunities of market, investment and growth. Together, we can achieve development for all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中华文明历来主张天下大同、协和万邦。希望大家共同努力，不断为推动建设开放型世界经济、构建人类命运共同体作出积极贡献！
The Chinese civilization has always valued peace under heaven and harmony among nations. Let us all work in that spirit and contribute to an open global economy and to a community with a shared future for mankind.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
6. 习近平在亚太经合组织工商领导人对话会上的主旨演讲
构建新发展格局　实现互利共赢
Fostering a New Development Paradigm and
Pursuing Mutual Benefit and Win-win Cooperation
——在亚太经合组织工商领导人对话会上的主旨演讲
（2020年11月19日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Address by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the APEC CEO Dialogues
19 November 2020
各位工商界朋友，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Leaders of the Business Community,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
在全球共抗新冠肺炎疫情、探索世界经济复苏道路的重要时刻，很高兴通过视频方式同大家见面。
At a critical time when the world is fighting COVID-19 and exploring ways to achieve economic recovery, I am glad to have this dialogue with you through video links.
人类正处在一个特殊的历史时期。新冠肺炎疫情全球大流行，推动世界百年未有之大变局加速演进。世界经济深度衰退，全球产业链、供应链遭受冲击，治理赤字、信任赤字、发展赤字、和平赤字仍在扩大。单边主义、保护主义、霸凌行径上升，经济全球化遭遇逆流，加剧了世界经济中的风险和不确定性。
This is an unusual time in history for us humanity. The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated changes unseen in a century in the world. The global economy finds itself into deep recession, its industrial and supply chains are disrupted, and governance, trust, development and peace deficits continue to grow. Mounting unilateralism, protectionism and bullying as well as backlash against economic globalization have added to risks and uncertainties in the world economy.
与此同时，和平与发展的时代主题没有改变，合作应对挑战是国际社会唯一选择。这场疫情再次说明，人类命运休戚与共，各国利益紧密相连，世界是不可分割的命运共同体。无论是赢得全球抗疫最终胜利，还是推动世界经济复苏，国际社会必须团结协作，共同应对危机考验。各国要守望相助、同舟共济，弘扬伙伴精神，密切政策沟通和协调，全面深化抗疫国际合作，坚持建设开放型世界经济，争取尽早战胜疫情，努力实现世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。
However, peace and development remain the underlying trend of our times. Meeting challenges through cooperation is the only way forward for us in the international community. This pandemic once again shows that the interests of all countries are closely interwoven and that humankind shares a common stake. Indeed, our world is an indivisible community with a shared future. To beat the virus and promote global recovery, we in the international community must close ranks and jointly respond to this crisis and meet the test. All countries should act in the spirit of partnership and get through this tough time together. We need to step up policy communication and coordination, intensify all-round global cooperation against COVID-19 and keep global economy open. By doing so, we can defeat the virus at an early date and achieve robust, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth for all.
今年以来，面对突如其来的疫情，中国坚持人民至上、生命至上，14亿人民上下一心，全国抗疫斗争取得重大战略成果。我们统筹疫情防控和经济社会发展工作，抓紧恢复生产生活秩序。前三季度，中国经济增长实现由负转正。这一成果来之不易，充分展现了中国经济的强大韧性和旺盛活力。中国经济发展稳中向好、长期向好的基本面没有变，我们完全有信心、有能力保持经济平稳运行，如期实现全面建成小康社会、打赢脱贫攻坚战的目标。
Since the start of this year, facing the sudden onslaught of COVID-19, China has put people and life above everything else. The 1.4 billion Chinese people, united as one, have made a major strategic achievement in fighting the virus. We have endeavored to both contain the virus and speedily bring production and life back to normal, thus maintaining economic and social development. China’s economy resumed positive overall growth in the first three quarters this year. This hard-won achievement speaks volumes about the resilience and vitality of the Chinese economy. The fundamentals sustaining China’s steady and long-term economic growth remain unchanged. We have full confidence and ability to maintain stable economic performance and achieve the goals of finishing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and eradicating poverty within the set time frame.
不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。我们提出构建新发展格局，是立足中国自身发展阶段和发展条件，充分考虑经济全球化和外部环境变化所作出的战略抉择。
At its recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th Central Committee, the Communist Party of China deliberated on and adopted the recommendations for formulating China’s 14th Five-Year Plan. According to the recommendations, China will complete building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame. From next year on, China will embark on a new journey toward fully building a modern socialist country. We will develop a full understanding of the new development stage, and apply the new development philosophy. We will foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. The new development paradigm is a strategic decision we have made based on the current stage and conditions of development in China and with full consideration given to economic globalization and changes in the external environment.
第一，我们将扭住扩大内需战略基点，畅通国民经济循环。近年来，中国市场和资源两头在外的发展模式已经悄然改变，外贸依存度由2006年的67%下降到2019年的近32%，经常项目顺差同国内生产总值比率由2007年的9.9%降至现在的不到1%。2008年国际金融危机发生以来，中国国内需求对经济增长的贡献率有7个年份超过100%，国内消费成为经济增长的主要动力。在推动经济双循环过程中，中国经济自主性和发展质量显著提升，构建新发展格局顺应了中国经济结构调整、推动高质量发展的内在需要。我们将继续深化供给侧结构性改革，在扩大内需上下更大功夫，使生产、分配、流通、消费更多依托国内市场，增强供给体系对国内需求的适配性，形成需求牵引供给、供给创造需求的更高水平动态平衡。
First, we will expand domestic demand as a strategic priority and ensure smooth flow of economic activity. In recent years, China’s development model of reliance on foreign markets and resources has gone through some gradual changes. The ratio of foreign trade to GDP dropped from 67 percent in 2006 to less than 32 percent in 2019, while the ratio of current account surplus to GDP has come down from 9.9 percent in 2007 to less than one percent today. In seven years since the 2008 global financial crisis, the contribution of China’s domestic demand to GDP exceeded 100 percent, making domestic consumption the main driver of its growth. In promoting domestic and international circulations, the Chinese economy has become much more domestically driven and the performance of China’s development has been significantly enhanced. Fostering a new development paradigm will enable China to better adjust its economic structure and achieve high-quality development. China will continue to deepen supply-side structural reforms and further expand domestic demand. Doing so will make production, distribution, flow of goods and services, and consumption in China more based on domestic market, and it will make the supply system better adapt to domestic demand. This will usher in a higher stage of well-adjusted balance where demand drives supply and supply, in turn, creates demand.
第二，我们将大力推动科技创新，打造经济发展新动能。当前，新一轮科技革命和产业变革加速发展，科技对提高社会生产力的贡献更加凸显。中国坚持把创新作为引领发展的第一动力，推进创新驱动发展战略，取得显著成就。随着中国进入新发展阶段，支撑发展的要素条件发生了深刻变化，必须实现依靠创新驱动的内涵型增长。我们将依托超大规模市场优势和完备产业体系，加速科技成果向现实生产力转化，打造科技、教育、产业、金融紧密融合的创新体系，不断提升产业链水平，为中国经济长远发展提供有力支撑。
Second, we will vigorously make scientific and technological innovations to foster new growth drivers. A new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation is gathering pace, and science and technology are playing an even more significant role in boosting social productivity. To China, innovation has always been the primary driver of development, and we have made major achievements by implementing an innovation-driven development strategy. As China enters a new stage of development, factors of production underpinning its development have gone through profound changes. This means that China must pursue innovation to achieve high-quality growth driven by domestic demand. We will fully leverage the demand of our super-sized domestic market and the strengths of its complete industrial system and redouble efforts to turn research outcomes into real productivity. We will endeavor to build an innovation system that integrates science and technology, education, industries and the financial sector, and upgrade the industrial chains. This will sustain China’s long-term economic development.
第三，我们将持续深化改革，充分激发市场活力。中国改革开放40多年的实践表明，改革是解放和发展社会生产力的关键。随着中国进入新发展阶段，改革也面临新任务，我们将拿出更大勇气、更多举措破除深层次体制机制障碍，推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化。我们将不断提高贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享新发展理念的能力和水平，转变发展方式，推动质量变革、效率变革、动力变革，加快现代化经济体系建设，加强产权和知识产权保护，建设高标准市场体系，完善公平竞争制度，让各类市场主体活力充分涌流。
Third, we will continue to deepen reform and energize the market. What we have achieved during the past 40-plus years of China’s reform and opening-up shows one thing: Reform is crucial for unleashing and boosting productivity. China has entered a new stage of development and faces new tasks of reform. We will take more steps and remove with greater resolve deep-seated systemic and institutional barriers to modernize China’s governance system and capacity. We will enhance our ability to better apply the new development philosophy, namely, one of pursuing innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. We will transform the growth model, upgrade quality and performance, and make growth drivers more robust. We will accelerate the building of a modernized economy, strengthen protection of property and intellectual property rights, set up a high-standard market system and improve mechanisms for fair competition. All this will fully motivate all types of market entities.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
开放是国家进步的前提，封闭必然导致落后。当今世界，经济全球化潮流不可逆转，任何国家都无法关起门来搞建设，中国也早已同世界经济和国际体系深度融合。我们绝不会走历史回头路，不会谋求“脱钩”或是搞封闭排他的“小圈子”。我们构建新发展格局，绝不是封闭的国内单循环，而是开放的、相互促进的国内国际双循环。
Openness enables a country to move forward, while seclusion holds it back. In today’s world where economic globalization has become an irreversible trend, no country can develop itself by keeping its doors closed. China is already deeply integrated into the global economy and the international system. We will not reverse course or run against historical trend by “decoupling” or forming a small circle to keep others out. By fostering a new development paradigm, we are not pursuing a closed-door circulation, but open and mutually reinforcing domestic and international circulations.
——在新发展格局下，中国市场潜力将充分激发，为世界各国创造更多需求。中国人均国内生产总值已经突破1万美元，有超过4亿中等收入人口，许多国际机构预计今年中国商品零售市场规模将达到6万亿美元。中国经济的不断发展，中国人民对美好生活的追求，将对来自世界各地更加多样化高品质的产品、技术、服务产生更多需求。尽管受到疫情冲击，中国货物贸易进口规模已基本恢复到去年同期水平。今年9月，在北京举办中国国际服务贸易交易会，吸引了148个国家和地区的2.2万家企业和机构线上线下参展参会。不久前，第三届中国国际进口博览会在上海成功举行，来自124个国家和地区的企业参展，展览面积进一步扩大，成交额进一步提升，达到726.2亿美元。我们将进一步降低关税和制度性成本，培育一批进口贸易促进创新示范区，扩大对各国高质量产品和服务进口。相信随着中国市场潜力不断激发，将为各国提供更广阔的市场机会，为世界经济稳定发展提供更强劲动力。
— The new development paradigm will enable China to fully unlock its market potential and create greater demand for other countries. China’s per capita GDP has topped US$10,000, and its middle-income population has exceeded 400 million. It is projected by many international institutions that China’s retail market will reach six trillion dollars in size this year. As China’s economy grows, our people naturally want to lead an even better life. This will create more demand for a greater variety of quality products, technologies and services from across the world. Despite the damage inflicted by COVID-19, China’s import of goods has basically recovered to the level of last year. The China International Fair for Trade in Services held in Beijing this September brought together 22,000 companies from 148 countries and regions to its online and off line events. Not long ago, the third China International Import Expo was successfully held in Shanghai. It was participated by companies from 124 countries and regions. The exhibition area was further expanded. More deals were sealed, reaching US$72.62 billion in value. China will further cut tariffs and government instituted transaction costs, and open a number of demonstration zones for creative promotion of import trade to increase import of quality goods and services. I am confident that the steady unleashing of the China market potential will create vast business possibilities for other countries, and this will create stronger impetus for maintaining stable growth of the global economy.
——在新发展格局下，中国开放的大门将进一步敞开，同世界各国共享发展机遇。对外开放是中国的基本国策，任何时候都不会动摇。今年以来，面对世界经济不稳定性不确定性明显增强，单边主义、保护主义蔓延，中国对外开放非但没有止步，而且推出了一系列扩大开放的政策措施，包括全面实施外商投资法及其实施条例、进一步缩减外商投资准入负面清单、稳步推动金融市场准入、出台海南自由贸易港建设总体方案、强化深圳和浦东的改革开放举措、深化服务贸易创新发展试点等。我愿重申，中国对外开放的决心坚定不移，对外开放的大门会越开越大。我们将继续推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，积极参与多双边区域投资贸易合作机制，打造更高水平的开放型经济。完善外商投资准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度，依法保护外资企业合法权益，有序扩大服务业对外开放，持续打造市场化、法治化、国际化营商环境。赋予自由贸易试验区更大改革自主权，建设对外开放新高地。与此同时，我们将继续坚定支持多边贸易体制，更加积极地参与全球经济治理体系改革，推动建立更加公平合理的国际经济治理体系。
— The new development paradigm will enable China to open up wider and share more opportunities for common development with other countries. China is committed to opening-up, which is its fundamental policy, a policy that will not change at any time. The world economy has faced more instability and uncertainty this year. Protectionism and unilateralism are mounting. Yet China has not stalled in its pursuit of opening-up. As a matter of fact, we have taken many policy steps to open the country still wider. It includes the following: The Foreign Investment Law and its supporting rules and regulations have been fully implemented. The negative list for foreign investment has been further cut. Access to the financial market has been steadily eased. A master plan has been drawn up for the development of the Hainan Free Trade Port. Reform and opening-up in Shenzhen and Pudong have been further advanced. And more pilot programs have been conducted for creative promotion of trade in services. I wish to reiterate that China’s commitment to opening-up is strong, and that China will open its door still wider to the world. China will continue to advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, to conclude, through negotiation, high-standard free trade agreements with more countries, and to actively engage in bilateral, multilateral and regional mechanisms for trade and investment cooperation. The purpose is to build a higher-standard open economy in China. China will improve its system for foreign investment management based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list. The lawful rights and interests of foreign investors will be protected. China will open up the service sector in a well-planned way, and foster a market-oriented, world-class business environment underpinned by a sound legal framework. China will give its pilot free trade zones greater power in carrying out reform, and turn them into new pacesetters of opening-up. At the same time, China will continue to firmly support the multilateral trading system, get more actively involved in reforming the system of global economic governance, and play its part to make this system fairer and more equitable.
——在新发展格局下，中国的对外合作将不断深化，同世界各国实现互利共赢。我们将更加积极地参与国际分工，更加有效地融入全球产业链、供应链、价值链，更加主动地扩大对外交流合作。凡是愿同中国合作的国家、地区、企业，我们都会积极开展合作。我们将继续高举开放合作大旗，坚持多边主义和共商共建共享原则，推动高质量共建“一带一路”，推进同各国、各地区发展战略和互联互通规划对接，加强政策、规则、标准融通，同各国不断深化基础设施建设、产业、经贸、科技创新、公共卫生、人文等领域务实合作，把“一带一路”打造成合作之路、健康之路、复苏之路、增长之路，加强绿色发展合作，为推动世界共同发展、构建人类命运共同体贡献力量。
— The new development paradigm will enable China to continue to deepen international cooperation for shared benefits. China will take a more active part in the international division of labor, get more effectively integrated into global industrial, supply and value chains, and more enthusiastically expand exchanges and cooperation with other countries. We welcome cooperation with every other region, country, or company that wants to do so. China will remain committed to openness and cooperation, and adhere to multilateralism and the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. China will work to pursue high-quality Belt and Road cooperation with its partners, and seek greater complementarity between the development strategies and connectivity plans of regions and countries concerned. China will further harmonize policies, rules and standards with BRI partners, and deepen effective cooperation with them on infrastructure, industry, trade, scientific and technological innovation, public health and people-to-people exchange. Together, we will make the Belt and Road a model of cooperation, health, recovery and growth and deepen cooperation on green development. This will allow us to contribute to common development and the building of a community with a shared future for mankind.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
亚太是我们的共同家园，维护亚太和平稳定、促进发展繁荣符合我们的共同利益。亚太各国既有人员密切往来之利，也有跨洋相望的地利之便。我们顺应市场规律，抓住经济全球化、区域经济一体化机遇，领风气之先，走在了世界经济增长的前列。亚太地区发展和区域经济合作深化，有其深刻的历史必然性，符合亚太各国人民愿望，也必将继续展现出强大生命力。
The Asia-Pacific is our shared home. To sustain peace, stability, development and prosperity in the region meets the interests of us all. As Asia-Pacific economies are connected by the same ocean, we benefit from close interactions between our peoples and geographic proximity. We should follow market trends, seize opportunities created by economic globalization and regional economic integration and become forerunners driving global growth. The development of the Asia-Pacific and greater economic cooperation in our region represent an underlying historical trend, and such development and cooperation will continue to be imbued with strong vitality, because they respond to the call of the people in our region.
去年，我提出构建开放包容、创新增长、互联互通、合作共赢的亚太命运共同体。今年，在各方共同参与下，亚太经合组织制定出2020年后的宏伟愿景，为未来一个时期亚太经济合作提供了重要指引。我们要深化命运共同体意识，持续推进区域经济一体化，加快创新发展步伐，促进区域互联互通，实现包容和可持续发展，把愿景一步步转变为现实，为亚太人民造福。
Last year, I proposed building an Asia-Pacific community with a shared future featuring openness, inclusiveness, innovation-driven growth, greater connectivity and mutually beneficial cooperation. This year, thanks to participation of all economies concerned, the APEC Post-2020 Vision has been formulated, which sets out ambitious goals and important guidelines for our future cooperation. Let us not forget that we are a community with a common stake, and let us move toward closer regional economic integration. We need to accelerate innovation-driven growth, enhance regional connectivity, and realize inclusive and sustainable development. Step by step, we can surely turn our vision into reality and deliver a better life for people in the region.
亚太工商界是引领和推动经济增长的重要力量，你们是亚太发展和合作成就的贡献者和见证者，也是亚太未来发展的建设者和受益者。当今世界面临更为复杂多元的挑战，亚太合作也进入新的历史阶段。工商界需要更开阔的格局、更坚韧的企业家精神。相信这会给你们带来更广阔的发展空间。希望大家做开放发展的推动者，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，维护亚太产业链、供应链安全稳定，推动亚太经济率先走向复苏、走向繁荣。希望大家做创新增长的探索者，大胆推动组织创新、技术创新、市场创新，使亚太成为科技“沃土”、创新“高地”。希望大家做互利共赢的合作者，深挖合作潜力，做大合作蛋糕，造福各国人民。希望大家做社会责任的践行者，积极参与国际抗疫合作，关注和帮扶弱势群体，为全球发展注入更多正能量。
The Asia-Pacific business community is an engine driving economic growth. You have witnessed development and cooperation in our region; and indeed, you have contributed to it every step on the way. You have an important role to play in shaping the future of our region, and there is no doubt you will benefit from its development. Asia-Pacific cooperation has entered a new historical stage at a time when the world is facing multiple challenges. The business community needs a broader vision, greater resilience and stronger entrepreneurship. With them, I am sure you will create greater prospects for business development. I hope you will contribute your share to promoting openness and development. You may work to advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and ensure the security and stability of industrial and supply chains of our region; and your work will enable the Asia-Pacific to take the lead in achieving economic recovery and prosperity. I hope you will explore innovation-driven growth. You may take bold steps to pursue organizational, technological and market innovations; that will make the Asia-Pacific a fertile ground for scientific breakthroughs and a pacesetter for innovation. I hope you will be partners for achieving win-win cooperation. You may tap fully into the potential for cooperation, and make the pie of cooperation even bigger for all our people to benefit from. I hope you will actively fulfill your social responsibilities. You may all play active parts in the international fight against COVID-19 and do more to help disadvantaged groups to add more momentum to global development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
疫情终将过去，胜利必将到来。让我们携起手来，风雨同舟、守望相助，坚持开放合作，畅通内外循环，共创共享亚太和世界更加美好的未来！
The day will come when we finally beat COVID-19 and win victory in this fight. Let us work in solidarity and weather the storm together. Let us stay true to openness and cooperation and make development and circulations at home and overseas reinforce each other. Together, we can surely deliver a brighter future for all of us, both here in the Asia-Pacific and across the world!
9. 习近平在第三届中国国际进口博览会开幕式上的主旨演讲
（2020年11月4日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The Third China International Import Expo
Beijing, 4 November 2020
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各代表团团长，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Your Excellencies Heads of Delegations,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
在各方共同努力下，第三届中国国际进口博览会开幕了！首先，我代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，向各位嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！对各位新老朋友，表示诚挚的问候！
With concerted efforts of all parties, the third China International Import Expo (CIIE) is now open. At the outset, let me extend, on behalf of the government and people of China as well as in my own name, a hearty welcome to all the distinguished guests. To the many old and new friends, I give you my warm greetings and best regards.
本届进博会是在特殊时期举办的。突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情给各国带来严重冲击，也给世界经济带来重创。中国在确保防疫安全前提下如期举办这一全球贸易盛会，体现了中国同世界分享市场机遇、推动世界经济复苏的真诚愿望。
This year’s CIIE is convened at a special time. COVID-19, which caught us all by surprise, has hit countries hard and dealt a heavy blow to the world economy. As scheduled and confident in the containment protocols that have been put in place, China is hosting this global trade event. It demonstrates China’s sincere desire to share its market opportunities with the world and contribute to global economic recovery.
经过3年发展，进博会让展品变商品、让展商变投资商，交流创意和理念，联通中国和世界，成为国际采购、投资促进、人文交流、开放合作的四大平台，成为全球共享的国际公共产品。
Over the past three years since its inception, the CIIE has enabled exhibits to become traded goods and exhibitors to spot more investment opportunities. It has facilitated an exchange of new and creative ideas, and better connected China and the wider world. Acting as a major platform for international procurement, for investment promotion, for cultural exchange and for open cooperation, the CIIE is now an international public good for the world to share.
本届进博会，各国企业参展踊跃，展览面积又扩大了近3万平方米。仅在新设立的公共卫生防疫专区，就有很多世界500强和行业龙头企业参与。这次采取线上线下结合方式，各方面都作了周密安排，相信一定能够办成一届安全、精彩、富有成效的博览会。
This year, the CIIE has drawn a large number of businesses around the globe. The exhibition area has expanded by nearly 30,000 square meters. A zone on public health and epidemic prevention has been added, which alone has attracted many Fortune Global 500 corporations and leading firms in relevant sectors. With both online and offline exhibitions arranged and thoughtful preparations made in every way, I am confident that the third CIIE will be a safe, exciting and successful expo for all of you.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
尽管受到疫情影响，今年中国扩大开放的步伐仍在加快。我在第二届中国国际进口博览会上宣布的扩大对外开放系列举措已经全面落实。中国持续扩大进口，一年来中国商品和服务进口额增速明显高于全球平均水平。全国外商投资准入负面清单由40条减到33条，自由贸易试验区由18个增至21个，海南自由贸易港建设总体方案、深圳进一步扩大改革开放的实施方案发布实施，商签高标准自由贸易协定、培育进口贸易促进创新示范区、保护知识产权、高质量共建“一带一路”等举措都取得了积极进展。
Notwithstanding COVID-19, the pace of opening up in China has continued to quicken this year. The measures I announced at last year’s CIIE have been implemented to the full. China has taken steady steps to expand imports, with imports of goods and services outpacing the global average over the past year. The items on the national negative list for foreign investment have been cut from 40 to 33. The number of pilot free trade zones has increased from 18 to 21. The Master Plan for the Development of Hainan Free Trade Port and the Implementation Plan for Further Reform and Opening-up in Shenzhen have both been released and taken effect. Good progress has been registered in concluding high-standard free trade agreements, developing demonstration zones for creative promotion of import trade, protecting intellectual property rights, and advancing high-quality Belt and Road cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
新冠肺炎疫情大流行使世界经济不稳定不确定因素增多。从历史上看，不管遇到什么风险、什么灾难、什么逆流，人类社会总是要前进的，而且一定能够继续前进。
The COVID-19 pandemic has added to the instability and uncertainty facing the world economy. However, looking back at history, humanity has always been able to forge ahead despite risks, disasters and headwinds, and humanity shall and will continue to stride forward.
各国走向开放、走向合作的大势没有改变。我们要携起手来，共同应对风险挑战，共同加强合作沟通，共同扩大对外开放。
The overwhelming trend for countries to move toward openness and cooperation remains unchanged. All countries need to come together to jointly tackle risks and challenges, strengthen cooperation and communication, and embrace greater openness.
——我们要致力于推进合作共赢的共同开放。这次疫情告诫我们，各国是休戚与共的命运共同体，重大危机面前没有谁能够独善其身，团结合作是应对挑战的必然选择。我们要坚持合作共赢理念，信任而不是猜忌，携手而不是挥拳，协商而不是谩骂，以各国共同利益为重，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
— We need to commit to mutual opening up that features shared benefits. COVID-19 is a stark reminder that all countries are in a community with a shared future. No one can stay immune in a major crisis. Solidarity and cooperation is the right choice to make in meeting challenges. We must uphold the principle of mutually beneficial cooperation. We need to build trust rather than second-guess each other; we need to join hands rather than throw punches at each other; and we need to consult rather than slander each other. Bearing in mind the common interests that bind us all, countries need to work together to make economic globalization more open, inclusive and balanced for the benefits of all.
——我们要致力于推进合作共担的共同开放。历史和实践证明，风险挑战面前，各国应该同舟共济、各尽其责，而不应该唯我独尊、损人不利己。大国要率先示范，主要经济体要以身作则，发展中国家要积极作为，通过共同开放、共担责任，推动世界共同发展。
— We need to commit to mutual opening up that features shared responsibilities. Both history and reality tell us that when confronted by risks and challenges, countries must work together as partners, with each shouldering its due responsibility. It is ill-advised to pursue unilateral dominance, or choose to hurt others’ interests, which diminishes one’s own interests. Big countries need to lead by example, major economies need to act on sound principles, and developing countries need to play an active part in promoting opening up and sharing responsibilities. It is by working together that we will advance common development of our world.
——我们要致力于推进合作共治的共同开放。面对经济全球化带来的挑战，不应该任由单边主义、保护主义破坏国际秩序和国际规则，而要以建设性姿态改革全球经济治理体系，更好趋利避害。要坚持共商共建共享的全球治理观，维护以世界贸易组织为基石的多边贸易体制，完善全球经济治理规则，推动建设开放型世界经济。
— We need to commit to mutual opening up that features shared governance. Faced with the challenges brought by economic globalization, we must not allow unilateralism or protectionism to undermine the international order and international rules. Rather, we need to reform the global economic governance system in a constructive way to better seize opportunities and avoid harm. Guided by a vision of global governance based on extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, we need to safeguard the multilateral trading system with the World Trade Organization (WTO) as its cornerstone, improve the rules of global economic governance, and build an open world economy.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
刚刚闭幕的中共十九届五中全会，对中国“十四五”时期发展作出全面规划。中国决胜全面建成小康社会、决战脱贫攻坚的目标即将实现，从明年起将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，中国将进入一个新发展阶段。适应新形势新要求，我们提出构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。这决不是封闭的国内循环，而是更加开放的国内国际双循环，不仅是中国自身发展需要，而且将更好造福各国人民。
The just concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted an overall plan for China’s development in the coming 14th five-year plan period. Very soon, China will achieve the goal of finishing building a moderately prosperous society in all respects and eradicating poverty. From next year on, China will begin a new journey toward fully building a modern socialist country. It will mark a new stage for China’s development. Answering to the changing circumstances and new requirements, we have set out to foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. What we envision is not a development loop behind closed doors, but more open domestic and international circulations. We will do so not only to meet China’s own development needs but also for the greater benefit of people in all countries.
中国有14亿人口，中等收入群体超过4亿，是全球最具潜力的大市场。预计未来10年累计商品进口额有望超过22万亿美元。中国制造已经成为全球产业链供应链的重要组成部分，作出了积极贡献。中国广阔的内需市场将继续激发源源不断的创新潜能。
China has a population of 1.4 billion and a middle-income group that exceeds 400 million. The vastly huge China market is the most promising in the world. Total import into China is estimated to top 22 trillion US dollars in the coming decade. Chinese manufacturing now makes an important and positive part of the global industrial and supply chains. Demand on the massive domestic market in China will continue to unleash endless potential for innovation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
新冠疫情对各国都是一场大考。中国人民经过艰苦卓绝努力，疫情防控取得重大战略成果。中国经济呈现稳定转好态势，前三季度实现了正增长，其中对外贸易额增长0.7%，实际使用外资增长5.2%，为推动世界经济复苏发挥了积极作用。为支持各国抗击疫情，中国人民毫无保留同各方分享经验，尽己所能为国际社会提供援助，截至10月20日，已向150个国家和7个国际组织提供抗疫援助，出口口罩1790多亿只、防护服17.3亿件、检测试剂盒5.43亿人份，展现了中国担当。
COVID-19 has put all countries through a tough test. In the case of China, our people have exerted extraordinary efforts and made major strategic gains in controlling the coronavirus. The Chinese economy is steadily picking up, as evidenced by the positive overall growth in the first three quarters, including a 0.7% growth in foreign trade and a 5.2% rise in paid-in foreign investment. This is a major contribution to economic recovery in the world. What’s more, out of solidarity with other countries in fighting COVID-19, the Chinese people have shared full experience and done our best to assist the international community. As of 20th October, China had provided assistance to 150 countries and seven international organizations and exported over 179 billion masks, 1.73 billion protective suits, and 543 million testing kits. This is how China has acted out its responsibility.
下一步，中国将秉持开放、合作、团结、共赢的信念，坚定不移全面扩大开放，将更有效率地实现内外市场联通、要素资源共享，让中国市场成为世界的市场、共享的市场、大家的市场，为国际社会注入更多正能量。
Going forward, China will stay committed to openness, cooperation and unity for win-win results. We will steadfastly expand all-round opening up and explore more efficient ways to connect domestic and foreign markets and share factors of production and resources. Our aim is to turn the China market into a market for the world, a market shared by all, and a market accessible to all. This way, we will be able to bring more positive energy to the global community.
第一，建设开放新高地。过去7年来，中国各自由贸易试验区锐意进取、大胆探索，取得显著成效。海南自由贸易港建设顺利开局。中国将有效发挥自由贸易试验区、自由贸易港引领作用，出台跨境服务贸易负面清单，在数字经济、互联网等领域持续扩大开放，深入开展贸易和投资自由化便利化改革创新，推动建设更高水平开放型经济新体制。
First, China will nurture new pacesetters of opening up. Over the past seven years, in pilot free trade zones in China, a lot has been done to break new ground and bold experiments have produced remarkable results. The Hainan Free Trade Port has been kicked off to a good start. China will continue to leverage the pioneering role of pilot free trade zones and free trade ports in steering opening up. We will introduce a negative list for cross-border services trade and open still wider in areas like the digital economy and the Internet. We will deepen reform and innovation in trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and make institutional innovations to support an open economy of higher standards.
第二，促进外贸创新发展。中国将继续通过进博会等开放平台，支持各国企业拓展中国商机。中国将挖掘外贸增长潜力，为推动国际贸易增长、世界经济发展作出积极贡献。中国将推动跨境电商等新业态新模式加快发展，培育外贸新动能。中国将压缩《中国禁止进口限制进口技术目录》，为技术要素跨境自由流动创造良好环境。
Second, China will pursue creative ways to grow foreign trade. Through the CIIE and other platforms of opening up, we will continue to support companies from around the world in exploring business opportunities in China. We will tap into the growth potential of foreign trade with a view to boosting growth in international trade and the world economy. China will encourage cross-border e-commerce and other new business forms and models to grow even quicker to foster new drivers of foreign trade. China will shorten its catalog of technologies prohibited or restricted from import to create a favorable environment for the free flow of technologies across borders.
第三，持续优化营商环境。中国在疫情后出台的各项纾困惠企政策，对在中国境内注册的企业一视同仁。今年，中国实施外商投资法和相关配套法规，进一步缩减了外商投资准入负面清单。中国将继续完善公开透明的涉外法律体系，强化知识产权保护，维护外资企业合法权益，以优质服务营造更好环境。
Third, China will keep improving its business environment. In the wake of COVID-19, China has adopted a range of pro-business relief policies that apply equally to all companies registered in China. Earlier this year, the Foreign Investment Law and its supporting rules and regulations came into effect, and the negative list on foreign investment was cut still shorter. China will continue to make its foreign-related legal framework more open and transparent, strengthen intellectual property protection, better protect the lawful rights and interests of foreign investors and provide them with more high-quality services to further improve the business environment.
第四，深化双边、多边、区域合作。中国愿同更多国家商签高标准自由贸易协定，推动尽快签署区域全面经济伙伴关系协定，加快中欧投资协定、中日韩等自由贸易协定谈判进程，加强同世界高标准自贸区交流互鉴。中国将积极参与世界贸易组织改革，积极参与联合国、二十国集团、亚太经合组织、金砖国家等机制合作。中国将同相关国家高质量共建“一带一路”，推动构建人类命运共同体。
Fourth, China will pursue deeper bilateral, multilateral and regional cooperation. China stands ready to conclude high-standard free trade agreements with more countries in the world. We will work for the early signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and speed up negotiations on a China-EU investment treaty and a China-Japan-ROK free trade agreement. We look forward to more exchanges and mutual learning with high-standard free trade zones in other parts of the world. China will take an active part in WTO reform and in cooperation at the United Nations, the G20, APEC, BRICS and other fora. China will work with partner countries to promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation and build a community with a shared future for mankind.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
中国人常说，“不到长城非好汉”。当前，世界经济发展面临严峻挑战，我们要坚定信心、增强勇气、共克时艰。中国愿同各国一道，在开放中创造机遇，在合作中破解难题，携手创造人类更加美好的明天！
As we often say in China, “Those who do not make their way to the Great Wall are not true heroes.” Now, at a time of formidable challenges facing the world economy, it is imperative that we bolster confidence and courage to tide over this difficult period together. China will join hands with all other countries to create opportunities in opening up, tackle difficult problems through cooperation, and foster a brighter future for humanity.
谢谢大家。
Thank you!
123. 习近平在亚太经合组织第二十二次领导人非正式会议上的闭幕辞
共建面向未来的亚太伙伴关系
Shaping the Future through Asia-Pacific Partnership
——在亚太经合组织第二十二次领导人非正式会议上的开幕辞
– Opening Remark at the 22nd APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting
中华人民共和国主席习近平
H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
2014年11月11日，北京
Beijing, 11 November 2014
各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴同大家聚会北京雁栖湖畔。首先，我谨对各位同事的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！
I am very glad to meet you at Yanqi Lake in Beijing. Let me first extend a warm welcome to all of you.
每年春秋两季，都有成群的大雁来到这里，雁栖湖因此得名。亚太经合组织的21个成员，就好比21只大雁。“风翻白浪花千片，雁点青天字一行。”今天，我们聚首雁栖湖，目的就是加强合作、展翅齐飞，书写亚太发展新愿景。
Each year, flocks of swan geese fly here and stay at the lake in spring and autumn, hence Yanqi Lake means the lake of swan geese. We 21 member economies of APEC are just like 21 swan geese. A line from an ancient Chinese poem reads: “The wind breaks waves into thousands of flowers on the sea; flocks of swan geese fly across the blue sky with their wings spread.” We are meeting here at Yanqi Lake to enhance cooperation and embark on a new flight to shape a new vision for the development of the Asia-Pacific region.
今年是亚太经合组织成立25周年。亚太经合组织的25年，也是亚太发展繁荣的25年。亚太经合组织见证了亚太发展的历史成就，亚太发展也赋予亚太经合组织新的使命。
This year marks the 25th anniversary of APEC. The past 25 years of APEC’s growth have also witnessed the development and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. APEC has witnessed the historic achievements of the Asia-Pacific’s development, which, in turn, has given APEC a new mission.
当前，世界经济复苏仍面临诸多不稳定不确定因素，亚太发展也进入新的阶段，既有机遇，也面临挑战。如何破解区域经济合作碎片化风险？如何在后国际金融危机时期谋求新的增长动力？如何解决互联互通建设面临的融资瓶颈？这些都需要我们深入思考、积极应对。
The world economic recovery still faces many unpredictable and destabilizing factors. The Asia-Pacific region has entered a new stage of development, facing both opportunities and challenges. How to tackle the risks of fragmentation of regional economic cooperation? How to create new growth momentum in the post-financial crisis period? How to remove the financing bottlenecks hindering connectivity? These are issues we need to consider and actively address.
面对新形势，我们应该深入推进区域经济一体化，打造有利于长远发展的开放格局。亚太经合组织应该发挥引领和协调作用，打破种种桎梏，迎来亚太地区更大范围、更高水平、更深层次的新一轮大开放、大交流、大融合。要打破亚太内部的封闭之门，敞开面向世界的开放之门。要在推进茂物目标的同时大力推进亚太自由贸易区进程，明确目标、方向、路线图，尽早将愿景变为现实，实现横跨太平洋两岸、高度开放的一体化安排。
In the face of new conditions, we need to intensify regional economic integration and foster an open environment that is conducive to long-term development. APEC should play a leading and coordinating role in breaking various shackles and unleash a new round of greater openness, exchange and integration at a higher level, in more areas and involving deeper structural adjustment. We need to open the closed doors within the Asia-Pacific region and open our region fully to the rest of the world. While continuing to advance the Bogor Goals, we should vigorously promote the development of the FTAAP by identifying targets and laying out directions and roadmaps. This will help realize, at an early date, the vision of completing a highly open integration arrangement that spans across the two sides of the Pacific Ocean.
面对新形势，我们应该全力推动改革创新，挖掘新的增长点和驱动力，打造强劲、可持续的增长格局。后国际金融危机时期，增长动力从哪里来？毫无疑问，动力只能从改革中来、从创新中来、从调整中来。我们要创新发展理念，从传统的要素驱动、出口驱动转变为创新驱动、改革驱动，通过结构调整释放内生动力。我们要改变市场管理模式，使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用。我们要推动科技创新，带动能源革命、消费革命，推动亚太地区在全球率先实现新技术革命。我们今年推动互联网经济、城镇化、蓝色经济等领域合作，探讨跨越“中等收入陷阱”问题，抓住了重大、前沿的国际经济议题，开了个好头。
In the face of new conditions, we need to vigorously promote reform and innovation, create new growth areas and driving forces, and ensure strong and sustainable growth. Where does growth momentum come from in the post-crisis period? Undoubtedly, it can only come from reform, innovation and readjustment. We need to be innovative in development approaches, pursue development through innovation and reform instead of driving it the usual way by relying on factors of production and export, and generate internal growth momentum through structural adjustment. We need to change the model of market regulations, allow the market to play a decisive role in resources allocation, and better play the role of the government. We need to advance scientific and technological innovation to facilitate energy and consumption revolution, and make the Asia-Pacific region a global leader in achieving new technological revolution. This year, we have promoted cooperation in Internet economy, urbanization and blue economy and discussed ways of leaping over the middle income trap, and a good beginning has been made in addressing all these major and urgent issues in the global economy.
面对新形势，我们应该加快完善基础设施建设，打造全方位互联互通格局。互联互通是一条脚下之路，无论是公路、铁路、航路还是网路，路通到哪里，我们的合作就在哪里。互联互通是一条规则之路，多一些协调合作，少一些规则障碍，我们的物流就会更畅通、交往就会更便捷。互联互通是一条心灵之路，你了解我，我懂得你，道理就会越讲越明白，事情就会越来越好办。实现亚太全方位互联互通，就是要让脚下之路、规则之路、心灵之路联通太平洋两岸的全体成员，打通融资贵、融资难的瓶颈，就是要加强公私伙伴关系建设，实现联动式发展。
In the face of new conditions, we need to speed up efforts to upgrade infrastructure and build comprehensive connectivity. Connectivity is about connecting physical structures. Our cooperation should extend to wherever roads, railways, air routes and the Internet take us. Connectivity is about connecting rules and regulations. When coordination and cooperation are enhanced and regulatory obstacles are reduced, logistics will become smoother and exchanges more convenient. Connectivity is also about connecting the hearts of people. With enhanced mutual understanding, we can achieve better communication and be more successful in our endeavors. In short, to achieve comprehensive connectivity in the Asia-Pacific, we should bring together all member economies on both sides of the Pacific by connecting physical structures, rules and regulations, and hearts of people. We should eliminate bottlenecks in accessing affordable financing, strengthen public-private partnerships, and achieve interconnected development.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
亚太经合组织是一个大家庭，打造发展创新、增长联动、利益融合的开放型亚太经济格局，符合所有成员共同利益。为了实现上述目标，亚太经济体需要共同构建互信、包容、合作、共赢的亚太伙伴关系，为亚太地区和世界经济发展增添动力。
We are all members of the APEC community. It meets the common interests of us all to foster an open economy in the Asia-Pacific featuring innovative development, interconnected growth and converging interests. To achieve this goal, all the economies in the region need to work together to build an Asia-Pacific partnership of mutual trust, inclusiveness, cooperation and win-win progress, and this will inject new energy into the economic development of both the Asia-Pacific and the world.
第一，共同规划发展愿景。亚太未来发展攸关每个成员利益。我们已经在启动亚太自由贸易区进程、推进互联互通、谋求创新发展等方面达成重要共识，要将共识转化为行动，规划今后5年、10年甚至25年的发展蓝图，一步步扎实向前推进。
First, we should jointly chart the course for future development. The future development of the Asia-Pacific is vital to the interests of every APEC member. Having reached important consensus on launching the process of FTAAP, promoting connectivity and pursuing innovative growth, what we should do now is to translate the consensus into action. We should draw the blueprint for development in the next five, ten or even 25 years and implement it step by step.
第二，共同应对全球性挑战。在后国际金融危机时期，我们既要抓住经济增长这个核心，加强宏观政策协调，又要妥善应对流行性疾病、粮食安全、能源安全等全球性问题，以信息共享增进彼此了解，以经验交流分享最佳实践，以沟通协调促进集体行动，以互帮互助深化区域合作。
Second, we should jointly meet global challenges. In the post-financial crisis period, we need to focus on the core task of sustaining growth and enhance macro policy coordination. We should also effectively address global issues such as epidemics, food security and energy security. We should share information to understand each other better, exchange experience to share best practices, facilitate collective actions through consultation and coordination, and boost regional cooperation through mutual assistance.
第三，共同打造合作平台。伙伴意味着一个好汉三个帮，一起做好事、做大事。我们应该将亚太经合组织打造成推动一体化的制度平台，加强经验交流的政策平台，反对贸易保护主义的开放平台，深化经济技术合作的发展平台，推进互联互通的联接平台。亚太经合组织的发展壮大有赖于大家共同支持。
Third, we should jointly build cooperation platforms. Partnership means pitching in for common goals and big initiatives. We should build APEC into an institutional platform for promoting integration, a policy platform based on experience sharing, an open platform against trade protectionism, a development platform to intensify economic and technical cooperation and a platform for boosting connectivity. A stronger and more dynamic APEC is possible only with support from all its members.
我愿在此宣布，中方将捐款1000万美元，用于支持亚太经合组织机制和能力建设，开展各领域务实合作。
I wish to announce here that China will donate 10 million US dollars to support APEC institutional and capacity building and its practical cooperation in various fields.
第四，共同谋求联动发展。伙伴意味着合作共赢、互学互鉴。当前，一些亚太发展中经济体面临较多困难，没有他们的发展，亚太发展就不可持续。我们要加大对发展中成员的资金和技术支持，发挥亚太经济体多样性突出的特点，优势互补，扩大联动效应，实现共同发展。
Fourth, we should jointly pursue interconnected development. Partnership also means win-win cooperation and mutual learning. Some developing economies in the Asia-Pacific region now face difficulties. If they cannot achieve development, development of the whole Asia-Pacific region will not be sustainable. We need to increase financial and technical support to developing members, give full rein to the strength of diversity among the Asia-Pacific economies, draw on each other’s strength, better leverage the amplifying effects and achieve common development.
未来3年，中国政府将为亚太经合组织发展中成员提供1500个培训名额，用于贸易和投资等领域的能力建设项目。
In the coming three years, the Chinese government will provide 1,500 training opportunities to APEC developing members in support of capacity-building projects in trade, investment and other fields.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
在“共建面向未来的亚太伙伴关系”主题下，我们将围绕“推动区域经济一体化”，“促进经济创新发展、改革与增长”，“加强全方位基础设施与互联互通建设”三项重点议题展开讨论。我期待并相信，这次会议将为亚太发展注入新的活力。
Under the theme of Shaping the Future through Asia-Pacific Partnership, we will discuss three important topics, namely, advancing regional economic integration, promoting innovative development, economic reform and growth, and strengthening comprehensive development in infrastructure and connectivity. I am confident that our meeting today will inject new vitality into the long-term development of the Asia-Pacific region.
一花不是春，孤雁难成行。让我们以北京雁栖湖为新的起点，引领世界经济的雁阵，飞向更加蔚蓝而辽阔的天空。
A single flower does not herald spring; a lone goose cannot make a formation. Let us take Yanqi Lake as the new starting point, and lead the flying swan geese of the global economy in soaring higher in the vast and blue sky.
谢谢大家！
Thank you!
120. 习近平在中国－拉共体论坛首届部长级会议开幕式上的致辞
共同谱写中拉全面合作伙伴关系新篇章
——在中国－拉共体论坛首届部长级会议开幕式上的致辞
（2015年1月8日）
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
Jointly Write a New Chapter in the Partnership of Comprehensive Cooperation Between China and Latin America and the Caribbean
Address by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the First Ministerial Meeting of The China-CELAC Forum
8 January 2015
尊敬的索利斯总统，尊敬的科雷亚总统，尊敬的马杜罗总统，尊敬的克里斯蒂总理，各位代表团团长，女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency President Luis Guillermo Solis Rivera, Your Excellency President Rafael Vicente Correa Delgado, Your Excellency President Nicolas Maduro Moros, The Right Honorable Prime Minister Perry Gladstone Christie, Heads of Delegations, Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
大家好！大家远道而来，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，向朋友们表示热烈的欢迎！	
Good morning. On behalf of the government and people of China and also in my own name, I want to warmly welcome our friends who have come all the way from your part of the world to be here.
这次，拉共体成员国代表齐聚北京，出席中拉论坛首届部长级会议这一中拉关系史上的盛会，给隆冬的北京带来热烈的气氛。	
Today, delegates representing member countries of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) gather in Beijing for the First Ministerial Meeting of the China-CELAC Forum, a grand gathering in the history of China-Latin America and the Caribbean relations. Your presence has brought warmth to Beijing in the depth of winter.
中拉论坛首届部长级会议的召开，标志着双方整体合作由构想变为现实。这次会议的主题是“新平台、新起点、新机遇——共同努力推进中拉全面合作伙伴关系”，反映了中拉论坛的特点和双方对整体合作的期望。	
The convening of the First Ministerial Meeting of the China-CELAC Forum marks the translation of our vision for overall cooperation into reality. The theme of the Meeting "New Platform, New Starting Point, New Opportunity－Joint Efforts to Promote China-Latin America and the Caribbean Partnership of Comprehensive Cooperation" well captures the features of the China-CELAC Forum and our shared aspiration for closer overall cooperation.
我相信，这次会议必将取得丰硕成果，向世界发出中拉深化合作、携手发展的积极信号，并对促进南南合作和世界繁荣进步产生重要而深远的影响。	
I am sure this meeting will yield rich results, send to the world a strong message of our commitment to deepening cooperation for common development, and have a major and far-reaching impact on South-South cooperation and the prosperity and progress of the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
半年前，我同拉美和加勒比国家领导人在巴西利亚举行了具有里程碑意义的会晤，双方决定建立平等互利、共同发展的中拉全面合作伙伴关系，正式建立中拉论坛，顺应了和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，是中拉关系史上的创举。	
Six months ago, I had a landmark meeting with leaders of Latin American and Caribbean countries in Brasilia. Our two sides decided to establish a partnership of comprehensive cooperation featuring equality, mutual benefit and common development between China and Latin America and the Caribbean and officially launch the China-CELAC Forum. The decision is in keeping with the trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation in our times. It is an innovation in China-Latin America and the Caribbean relations.
半年来，中拉双方以《中拉领导人巴西利亚会晤联合声明》为指针，共同致力于构建政治上真诚互信、经贸上合作共赢、人文上互学互鉴、国际事务中密切协作、整体合作和双边关系相互促进的中拉关系五位一体新格局，深入推进各领域互利合作，中拉关系呈现蒸蒸日上的新气象。	
Over the last six months, our two sides have followed the guidance of the Joint Statement of the Leaders's Meeting in Brasilia, and worked together to build a new, five-dimensional relationship characterized by sincerity and mutual trust in the political field, win-win cooperation on the economic front, mutual learning and emulation in the cultural sphere, close coordination in international affairs, as well as synergy between China's cooperation with the region as a whole and its bilateral relations with individual regional countries. With the deepening of mutually beneficial cooperation in all areas, the relations between China and Latin America and the Caribbean are flourishing.
——政治互信进一步提升。双方保持高层交往和其他各层级往来，就发展道路、治国理政、外交政策等涉及各自核心利益和重大关切的议题坦诚深入对话，相互理解日益加深，战略共识不断扩大。	
－Our mutual political trust has been enhanced. We have maintained high-level exchanges and contacts at other levels and carried out candid and in-depth dialogue on development path, governance, foreign policy and other topics concerning our respective core interests and major concerns. As a result, our mutual understanding is deepening and strategic consensus growing.
——务实合作进一步扩大。在中方倡导的“1＋3＋6”务实合作框架内，双方积极制定未来5年合作规划，全速发动贸易、投资、金融合作三大引擎，能源资源、基础设施建设、农业、制造业、科技创新、信息技术六大领域一批重大合作项目已经或正在形成。	
－Our practical cooperation has been widened. Within the "1+3+6" cooperation framework proposed by China, our two sides have worked hard to develop a cooperation plan for the coming five years and get the three engines of trade, investment and financial cooperation to run at full speed. A group of major cooperation projects in the six areas of energy and resources, infrastructure, agriculture, manufacturing, innovation in science and technology, and information technologies have been decided upon and more are in the pipeline.
——人文交流进一步密切。双方立法机构、政党、地方交流络绎不绝，科技、教育、文化、旅游等领域合作蓬勃开展，双方人民友谊继续加深，中国的“拉美热”和拉美的“中国热”持续升温。	
－Our people-to-people exchanges have been intensified. There are regular exchanges between our legislatures, political parties and local authorities and robust cooperation in science and technology, education, culture, tourism and other fields, contributing to the deepening friendship between our people and a growing interest in each other.
——国际协作进一步增强。双方在联合国、亚太经合组织、二十国集团、七十七国集团等国际组织和多边机制框架内，就全球治理、可持续发展、气候变化等重大议题加强协调和配合，中拉合作的战略意义和国际影响日益凸显。	
－Our international coordination has been strengthened. At the United Nations, APEC, G20, G77 and other international organizations and multilateral mechanisms, we have stepped up coordination and cooperation on such major issues as global governance, sustainable development and climate change. The strategic importance and international influence of our cooperation has become all the more evident.
——整体合作进一步推进。双方在短短半年时间里完成中拉论坛首届部长级会议筹备工作，从政治设计、务实合作、机制建设等方面展开积极探讨，集思广益，凝聚共识，为中拉整体合作开好局、起好步打下了良好基础。	
－Our overall cooperation has been advanced. We have completed the preparations for this inaugural Ministerial Meeting in just six months. We have vigorously explored the political design, practical cooperation and institutional building, pooled our wisdom, and built consensus, laying a good foundation for a good start in our overall cooperation.
中拉关系全面快速发展，得益于双方对世界发展潮流认知更加一致，对中拉关系发展前景信心更加坚定，对互为发展机遇共识更加清晰，对构建中拉命运共同体愿望更加强烈。这符合我们双方的共同利益，也有利于亚洲同拉美和加勒比两大地区乃至世界和平与发展。
The rapid, all-round growth of China-Latin America and the Caribbean relations is the result of our enhanced agreement in the perceptions of the global trend, our greater confidence in the prospects of our relations, our clearer consensus on viewing each other as a development opportunity, and our stronger aspiration for a China-Latin America and the Caribbean community of shared destinies. This serves the shared interests of both sides as well as peace and development of Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean and that of the world at large.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
当今世界是一个发展变革的世界，是一个新机遇新挑战层出不穷的世界，是一个国际体系和国际秩序深度调整的世界，是一个国际力量对比朝着有利于和平与发展方向深刻变化的世界。	
We live in a changing world, a world full of new opportunities and new challenges. The world today is witnessing profound adjustments in the international system and international order, and the international balance of power is shifting in a way that is more favorable for peace and development in the world.
一大批发展中国家和新兴市场国家快速发展，通过南南合作相互输送动力，增强了自身实力和自主发展能力，为后国际金融危机时期的世界经济注入新的动力，也有力推动了国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。	
A large number of developing countries and emerging market economies are on track of fast development. Through South-South cooperation, they have managed to draw on the development momentum of each other to grow in strength and independent development capacity, which consequently added impetus to the growth of the post-crisis world economy and significantly boosted development of the international order toward greater fairness and justice.
中拉携手同行、深化合作恰逢其时。中国同拉美和加勒比国家国土面积之和占世界陆地总面积的五分之一，人口之和占世界总人口的三分之一，经济总量占世界经济总量的八分之一。这是中拉关系全面深入发展的巨大优势和宝贵资源。
It is time for China and Latin American and Caribbean countries to advance our cooperation and bring it to an even greater depth. When combined, China and Latin American and Caribbean countries cover one fifth of the world's total land mass and are home to one third of the world's population. Together, we account for one eighth of the global economy. This puts us in an advantaged position and gives us valuable resources to bring about all-round and profound growth of our relations.
中拉论坛是新生事物，犹如一株破土而出的嫩苗，要长成参天大树，需要双方精心培育。在这次会议上，中国同拉共体成员国将围绕双方整体合作和中拉论坛建设进行深入探讨，并通过《中拉论坛首届部长级会议北京宣言》、《中国与拉美和加勒比国家合作规划（2015－2019）》、《中拉论坛机制设置和运行规则》3个成果文件。	
The China-CELAC Forum, a young seedling in our eyes, needs the dedication and cultivation of both sides for it to grow bigger and stronger. During this Forum meeting, China and CELAC members will have in-depth discussions on overall cooperation and Forum building. Three outcome documents will be adopted, namely, the Beijing Declaration of the First Ministerial Meeting of the China-CELAC Forum, the China-Latin American and Caribbean Countries Cooperation Plan (2015-2019), and the Institutional Arrangements and Operating Rules of China-CELAC Forum.
《北京宣言》将集中反映双方对推进中拉全面合作伙伴关系的政治共识，确定整体合作和论坛建设的总体方向，明确双方深化合作的指导原则。	
The Beijing Declaration will highlight the political consensus between the two sides on promoting our partnership of comprehensive cooperation. It will set the general direction for overall cooperation and forum building and lay down the guiding principles for deepening cooperation between the two sides.
《合作规划》将确定今后5年中拉开展整体合作的重点领域和具体措施，涵盖政治与安全、贸易投资金融、基础设施建设、能源资源、工业、农业、科技人文等。	
The Cooperation Plan will identify priority areas and specify measures to be taken by China and Latin American and Caribbean countries in the coming five years to advance overall cooperation. They will cover the political and security, trade, investment, finance, infrastructure, energy, resources, industry, agriculture, science, technology and cultural fields.
《中拉论坛机制设置和运行规则》旨在为论坛建章立制，将明确部长级会议、中国－拉共体“四驾马车”定期对话、中拉国家协调员会议等协调合作机制，为落实双方政治共识和合作规划提供制度保障。	
The Institutional Arrangements and Operating Rules of the China-CELAC Forum is designed to promote institutional building, as it will define the forum's coordination and cooperation mechanisms, such as the ministerial meeting, the dialogue of foreign ministers of China and the "Quartet" of CELAC and the meeting of national coordinators, so as to provide institutional guarantee for the implementation of political consensus and cooperation plans between the two sides.
我高兴地看到，去年7月我在中拉领导人会晤期间提出的一系列合作倡议正在得到积极落实。其中，200亿美元的中拉基础设施专项贷款、100亿美元的优惠性质贷款和50亿美元的中拉合作基金已经或即将开始实质运行，5000万美元的中拉农业合作专项资金已开始向双方合作项目提供资金支持。中国有关部门已经着手落实5年内向拉共体成员提供6000个奖学金名额和6000个来华培训名额事宜，以及邀请1000名拉美政党领导人访华计划和“未来之桥”中拉青年领导人千人培训计划。中方倡议的中拉科技伙伴计划、中拉青年科学家交流计划以及2016年举办中拉文化交流年相关工作也在积极推进。中方欢迎拉共体成员国积极参与上述合作项目。
I am happy to note that a number of cooperation initiatives I proposed last July at the China-Latin American and Caribbean Countries Leaders' Meeting are being earnestly implemented. Among them, the US$20 billion special loan for infrastructure building projects, the US$10 billion preferential loan and the US$5 billion fund for China-Latin America and the Caribbean cooperation have been or will soon be put into substantive operation. The US$50 million special fund for agricultural cooperation has started to provide funding support for cooperation projects. Besides, the competent departments of China have started to work on the provision of 6,000 government scholarships and 6,000 training opportunities to CELAC members in the coming five years. They have also started work regarding planned invitation of 1,000 leaders of political parties from Latin American and Caribbean countries to visit China as well as the "Bridge for the Future" training program that will involve 1,000 young leaders from China and Latin American and Caribbean countries. The proposed "Science and Technology Partnership" , the "Young Scientists Exchange Program" as well as the planned 2016 Year of Cultural Exchanges put forward by China are all making steady progress. China welcomes CELAC members to take an active part in these programs.
借此机会，我愿对中拉论坛未来发展谈几点意见。	
Using today's opportunity, I wish to share with you the following thoughts regarding development of the Forum in the coming years.
第一，坚持平等相待的合作原则。“尺有所短，寸有所长。”中国和拉共体成员国不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是中拉论坛这个大家庭的平等成员。大家应该坚持友好协商、共同建设、共享成果的理念，兼顾各方利益和关切，最大限度凝聚共识，打牢整体合作政治基础。	
First, we need to commit ourselves to the cooperation principle of acting as equal partners. Countries big and small all have their own merits. China and CELAC members, however different in size, strength and level of development, are equal members of the China-CELAC Forum family. We may come together under the vision of friendly consultation, joint development and outcomes sharing, accommodate each other's interests and concerns and build as much consensus as we can so as to lay a solid political foundation for overall cooperation.
第二，坚持互利共赢的合作目标。中拉论坛作为中国和拉共体成员国政府间合作机制，涵盖政治、经贸、人文、社会、科技等广泛领域。双方应该牢牢把握共同发展的主旋律，加强论坛机制建设，规划好整体合作蓝图，争取早期收获，实现“1加1大于2”的效果，确保论坛可持续发展。	
Second, we need to adhere to the goal of win-win cooperation. As a governmental cooperation mechanism between China and CELAC members, the forum covers political, economic, trade, people-to-people, cultural, social, science and technology, and many other areas. Our two sides should keep firmly to the goal of pursuing common development, enhance institutional building of the forum, and draw up a blueprint for conducting overall cooperation. This will allow us to produce early harvest and achieve the effect of making one plus one bigger than two, and ensure sustainable development of the forum.
第三，坚持灵活务实的合作方式。中方主张，中拉整体合作同中国和拉共体成员国之间的双边合作并行不悖，两者相互补充、相互促进。各方可以在中拉论坛及相关领域分论坛框架内，共同商定重点合作领域和合作项目，通过双边和多边渠道开展形式多样的合作，实现优势互补。	
Third, we need to pursue cooperation in flexible and pragmatic ways. It is China's view that China-CELAC overall cooperation and bilateral cooperation between China and CELAC members should be conducted on a parallel basis, which complement and reinforce each other. We may, within the framework of the China-CELAC Forum and relevant forums on specific fields, identify priority areas and projects of cooperation and carry out both bilateral and multilateral cooperation in diversified ways to draw on each other's strengths.
第四，坚持开放包容的合作精神。中拉论坛框架内的合作要充分考虑相关各方不同利益诉求，照顾彼此舒适度。我们欢迎拉美和加勒比其他地区组织和多边机构积极参与中拉整体合作。中拉论坛不仅有利于双方团结协作和南南合作，也必将为促进世界发展繁荣作出积极贡献。	
Fourth, we need to ensure open and inclusive cooperation. In conducting the cooperation within the China-CELAC framework, it is important to give full account to different interests and needs of various parties and accommodate each other's comfort level. We welcome active participation in China-CELAC overall cooperation by other regional organizations and multilateral institutions in Latin America and the Caribbean. The forum will therefore contribute to not only solidarity and collaboration between the two sides, but also South-South cooperation and development and prosperity of the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
拉美和加勒比地大物博，发展条件得天独厚，是最具发展潜力的新兴地区之一。近年来，拉美地区保持稳定发展的良好态势，在拉共体等地区组织引领下，联合自强和一体化建设不断取得新进展，整体实力和国际影响力不断增强。拉美和加勒比国家积极推进多元外交，更加重视发展同包括中国在内的亚太各国友好合作关系，为中拉关系全面深入发展提供了更大空间。	
Latin America and the Caribbean, which is endowed with abundant resources for development, is one of the most promising emerging regions in the world. In recent years, the region has maintained sound momentum of stability and development. Led by CELAC and other regional organizations, it has achieved fresh progress in strengthening itself through unity and accelerating regional integration. As a result, its overall strength and international influence have been enhanced. Countries in the region have actively pursued multi-direction diplomacy, and they have given priority to fostering friendly and cooperative ties with China and other Asia-Pacific countries, thus creating more space for promoting all-round growth of their relations with China.
当前，中国人民正在为全面建成小康社会、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗，拉美和加勒比各国人民也在为实现团结协作、发展振兴的拉美梦而努力。共同的梦想和共同的追求，将中拉双方紧密联系在一起。	
The Chinese people are striving to finish the building of a society of initial prosperity in all respects and realize the Chinese dream of great national renewal. The people in Latin America and the Caribbean are endeavoring to achieve their dream of solidarity, collaboration, development and revitalization. So we are bound together by shared dreams and common pursuits.
中国坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持走和平发展道路，坚持互利共赢的开放战略，坚持和积极践行正确义利观，讲信义、重情义、扬正义、树道义，愿将中国发展同广大发展中国家共同发展紧密结合起来，共同致力于建立以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系。	
China is committed to pursuing an independent foreign policy of peace, peaceful development and a win-win strategy of opening-up. China champions and practices a right approach to principles and interests, and it upholds good-faith, friendship and justice. China will integrate its own development with the common development of other developing countries and work with them to build a new type of international relations of win-win cooperation.
现在，中国经济发展进入了新常态，今后一个时期将继续保持中高速增长。未来5年，中国将进口超过10万亿美元商品，对外投资超过5000亿美元，出境旅游将超过5亿人次。这将给包括拉美和加勒比国家在内的世界各国提供更多市场机遇、增长机遇、投资机遇、合作机遇。我们要共同努力，实现10年内中拉双方贸易规模达到5000亿美元、中国在拉美地区直接投资存量达到2500亿美元的目标。	
Looking ahead, China will maintain medium to high rate of growth, as its economy has entered a new normal. In the next five years, China will import more than US$10 trillion of goods and make over US$500 billion outbound investment, and over 500 million overseas visits will be made by Chinese tourists. All this will offer more market, investment, growth and cooperation opportunities to countries in Latin America, the Caribbean and the rest of the world. In the next ten years, we will work together to raise two-way trade to US$500 billion, and China's direct investment in the region will rise to US$250 billion.
中拉双方为论坛设计了一个精美的徽标。它形如环绕相伴的一对和平鸽，又如紧紧相握的双手，象征着中拉密切合作、展翅高飞。	
Our two sides have designed an exquisite emblem for the forum. It is in the shape of a pair of peace doves or two clasped hands, which symbolizes close cooperation between the two sides soaring to great heights.
总之，中方愿同拉美和加勒比国家一道，以长远眼光，从战略高度，共同打造好中拉整体合作这一新平台，以中拉论坛首届部长级会议为新起点，牢牢抓住中拉整体合作新机遇，共同谱写中拉全面合作伙伴关系新篇章，推动中拉关系在更高水平上实现新发展！	
In a word, with the long-term and strategic goal in mind, China will work with Latin American and Caribbean countries to ensure the success of the new platform of China-CELAC overall cooperation. We should take the first Ministerial Meeting as a new starting point and seize new opportunities in China-CELAC overall cooperation. With these efforts, we will write a new chapter in our partnership of comprehensive cooperation and raise our relations to a higher level.
最后，预祝这次会议取得圆满成功！	
To conclude, I wish the meeting every success.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
96. 习近平在中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会开幕式上的致辞
开启中非合作共赢、共同发展的新时代
——在中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会开幕式上的致辞
（2015年12月4日，约翰内斯堡）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Open a New Era of China-Africa Win-Win Cooperation and Common Development
Address by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the Opening Ceremony of the Johannesburg Summit of
The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
4 December 2015
尊敬的祖马总统，
尊敬的非洲联盟轮值主席穆加贝总统，
尊敬的各国元首、政府首脑，
尊敬的非盟委员会主席祖马女士，
尊敬的各位同事，各位嘉宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency President Zuma,
Your Excellency President Mugabe, Rotating Chairperson of the African Union,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellency Dr. Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Dear Colleagues,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
很高兴在美丽的“彩虹之国”南非，同这么多非洲兄弟、新老朋友相聚一堂。作为会议共同主席，我也热烈欢迎大家出席中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会，衷心感谢东道国南非为这次会议所作的精心准备和周到安排。	
It gives me great pleasure to meet so many African brothers and sisters, who are both old and new friends of mine, in the beautiful Rainbow Nation of South Africa. As co-chair of the Summit, I wish to express my warm welcome to you for attending the Johannesburg Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC). I also wish to express my sincere appreciation to South Africa, host of the Summit, for the meticulous preparations and thoughtful arrangements it has made for this meeting.
这是我第七次踏上非洲大陆，也是我担任中国国家主席后第二次访问非洲。每次来到非洲，都能看到非洲的新发展新变化。	
This is my seventh visit to the African continent and also my second visit to Africa after taking office as the Chinese President. Every time I visit Africa, I see new progress and new changes on this continent.
今天的非洲呈现出蓬勃发展的新景象，令人振奋、令人鼓舞。非洲积极探索符合自身实际的发展道路，坚持以非洲方式解决非洲问题，独立自主势头锐不可当。非洲积极推进工业化，谋求自主可持续发展，快速发展势头锐不可当。非洲加快一体化进程，在国际舞台上坚持用一个声音说话，联合自强势头锐不可当。	
Today's Africa is a continent of encouraging and dynamic development. Africa has actively explored a path of development suited to its conditions and adhered to the principle of solving African issues in the African way. Such a momentum of independent development is unstoppable. Africa has actively advanced industrialization and pursued sustainable self-development. Such a momentum of rapid growth is unstoppable. Africa has accelerated its integration process and speaks in one voice on the international stage. Such a momentum of pursuing strength through unity is unstoppable.
我欣赏南非前总统曼德拉先生说过的一句话，“我们正站立在非洲世纪的破晓时分，在这一世纪里，非洲将在世界民族之林占据应有位置。”我相信，非洲国家和人民正在迎来真正属于自己的新时代！	
The late President Nelson Mandela of South Africa once said, "We stand at the dawn of an African century, a century where Africa will take its rightful place among the nations of the world." I couldn't agree more with this statement, and I am convinced that African countries and people are embracing a new era that is truly theirs.
中国政府和人民为非洲取得的发展成就感到由衷高兴和自豪，衷心祝愿非洲国家和人民在发展进步的道路上不断取得更大成就、拥有更加美好的未来！	
We in China, both the government and people, heartily rejoice over and are proud of Africa's achievements. We sincerely wish African countries and people greater achievements and an even brighter future in pursuing development and progress.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！	
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
中非历来是命运共同体。共同的历史遭遇、共同的奋斗历程，让中非人民结下了深厚的友谊。	
China and Africa share a common future. We Chinese and Africans have forged profound friendship through our common historical experience and in our common struggles.
长期以来，我们始终风雨同舟、相互支持。中国援建的坦赞铁路和非盟会议中心成为中非友谊的丰碑。中国政府和人民在援非抗击埃博拉行动中率先行动，引领国际社会援非抗疫，诠释了中非患难与共的兄弟情谊。非洲国家无私支持中国重返联合国，在中国汶川、玉树等地发生严重地震灾害后踊跃向中方捐款，中国人民对此铭记在心。	
We have always supported each other in trying times. The Tazara Railway and the Convention Center of the African Union built with Chinese assistance are landmarks of China-Africa friendship. The Chinese government and people took the lead in helping Africa fight Ebola and led the international community in its efforts to assist Africa to combat the epidemic, demonstrating the bond of brotherhood between China and Africa in time of difficulty. On our part, we deeply appreciate the African countries' selfless support to China's return to the United Nations and their donations made to China when China's Wenchuan and Yushu areas were hit by massive earthquakes.
中非友好历久弥坚、永葆活力，其根本原因就在于双方始终坚持平等相待、真诚友好、合作共赢、共同发展。中非永远是好朋友、好伙伴、好兄弟。	
What has made China-Africa friendship durable and vigorous is that our two sides have always been guided by the principle of treating each other as equals, promoting win-win progress and common development and enhancing sincere friendship and cooperation. China and Africa will forever remain good friends, good partners and good brothers.
当前，中非都肩负发展国家、改善民生的使命。非洲拥有丰富的自然和人力资源，正处于工业化的兴起阶段。中国经过30多年改革开放，拥有助力非洲实现自主可持续发展的技术、装备、人才、资金等物质优势，更拥有支持非洲发展强大的政治优势。中非合作发展互有需要、优势互补，迎来了难得的历史性机遇。	
China and Africa both shoulder the mission of developing our respective countries and improving the livelihood of our peoples. Africa enjoys abundant natural and human resources and has reached the stage of taking off in industrialization. China, after reform and opening-up of over 30 years, now has the technology, equipment, professional and skilled personnel and capital needed to help Africa realize sustainable self-development. In particular, China has the strong political commitment to supporting Africa in achieving development and prosperity. China and Africa share mutual needs and complementarities and face a rare historic opportunity in pursuing development through cooperation.
新形势下，我们要传承和发扬中非传统友好，更要把中非传统友好优势转化为促进团结、合作、发展的动力，为中非人民创造更多实实在在的成果，为推动世界更加均衡、公平、包容发展，构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系作出更大贡献。	
In the new era, we should carry forward the traditional China-Africa friendship and translate the strengths of our traditional friendship into driving forces to boost solidarity, cooperation and development, so that we will deliver more tangible benefits to our peoples and make greater contribution to the development of the world in a more balanced, just and inclusive manner and to the building of a new model of international partnership based on win-win cooperation.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！	
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
当前，世界格局正在经历深刻演变，经济全球化、社会信息化极大解放和发展了社会生产力。我们面临前所未有的发展机遇。同时，霸权主义、恐怖主义、金融动荡、环境危机等问题愈加突出，给我们带来前所未有的挑战。	
The world is undergoing profound changes. Economic globalization and IT application have tremendously unleashed and advanced social productive forces. We are facing unprecedented opportunities of development. On the other hand, hegemony, terrorism, financial turbulence and environmental crisis have become more pronounced, posing unprecedented challenges to us.
中方将秉持真实亲诚对非政策理念和正确义利观，同非洲朋友携手迈向合作共赢、共同发展的新时代。为此，我提议，将中非新型战略伙伴关系提升为全面战略合作伙伴关系，并为此做强和夯实“五大支柱”。	
In conducting China's relations with Africa, we adhere to the principles of sincerity, practical results, affinity and good faith and uphold the values of friendship, justice and shared interests, and we will work with our African friends to embrace a new era of win-win cooperation and common development. With this in mind, I propose that the new type of China-Africa strategic partnership be upgraded to a comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership. To forge this partnership, we should strengthen the following "five major pillars."
第一，坚持政治上平等互信。高度政治互信是中非友好的基石。我们要尊重各自选择的发展道路，不把自己的意志强加给对方。在事关双方核心利益和重大关切问题上，要坚持相互理解、相互支持，共同维护公平正义。中方始终主张，非洲是非洲人的非洲，非洲的事情应该由非洲人说了算。	
First, we should remain committed to political equality and mutual trust. A high degree of political mutual trust is the foundation of China-Africa friendship. We should respect each other's choice of development path and not impose one's own will on the other. On issues involving core interests and major concerns of each side, we should show mutual understanding, support each other and jointly uphold equity and justice. China strongly believes that Africa belongs to the African people and that African affairs should be decided by the African people.
第二，坚持经济上合作共赢。中国人讲究“义利相兼，以义为先”。中非关系最大的“义”，就是用中国发展助力非洲的发展，最终实现互利共赢、共同发展。我们要充分发挥中非政治互信和经济互补的优势，以产能合作、三网一化为抓手，全面深化中非各领域合作，让中非人民共享双方合作发展成果。	
Second, we should remain committed to promoting win-win economic cooperation. We Chinese value both friendship and justice as well as shared interests and place more importance on the former. Friendship and justice, which defines China-Africa relations, require us to facilitate Africa's development endeavor with China's development and ultimately deliver win-win progress and common development through mutually beneficial cooperation. We should fully leverage the strengths of political mutual trust and economic complementarities between China and Africa, and focus on industrial capacity cooperation as well as the three networks and industrialization. By doing so, we can deepen China-Africa cooperation in all areas and bring its benefits to our peoples.
第三，坚持文明上交流互鉴。世界因为多彩而美丽。我们为中非都拥有悠久灿烂的文明而自豪。我们要加强中非两大文明交流互鉴，着力加强青年、妇女、智库、媒体、高校等各界人员往来，促进文化融通、政策贯通、人心相通，推动共同进步，让中非人民世代友好。	
Third, we should remain committed to mutually enriching cultural exchanges. Diversity makes the world beautiful. We are proud that both China and Africa have time-honored and splendid civilizations. We should strengthen cultural exchanges and mutual learning between China and Africa, facilitate more exchanges between the youths, women, think tanks, media, universities and other sectors of the two sides, promote cultural interactions, policy coordination and people-to-people exchanges to advance common progress and ensure the sustained growth of China-Africa friendship from generation to generation.
第四，坚持安全上守望相助。贫困是动荡的根源，和平是发展的保障，发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。中方支持非洲人以非洲方式解决非洲问题，主张解决安全问题要标本兼治、综合施策，愿意积极参与非洲加强维护和平安全能力建设，支持非洲加快发展，消除贫困，实现持久和平。	
Fourth, we should remain committed to mutual assistance in security. Poverty is the root cause of chaos while peace is the guarantee for development. Development holds the key to solving all problems. China supports the settlement of African issues by Africans in the African way. We are of the view that in resolving security issues, both the symptoms and the root causes must be addressed in a holistic way. China stands ready to take an active part in Africa's efforts in capacity-building for maintaining and strengthening peace and security and support Africa in its endeavors to speed up development, eradicate poverty and realize durable peace.
第五，坚持国际事务中团结协作。中非在国际事务中拥有广泛的共同语言和共同利益。我们要加强协商协作，推动全球治理体系向着更加公正合理的方向发展，维护共同利益。中方将继续在联合国等场合为非洲仗义执言、伸张正义，支持非洲在国际舞台上发挥更大作用。	
Fifth, we should remain committed to solidarity and coordination in international affairs. China and Africa share common position on and interests in a wide range of international issues. We should strengthen consultation and coordination so as to make the global governance system more just and equitable and uphold our common interests. China will continue to stand up and speak for Africa at the United Nations and other fora to support Africa in playing a greater role on the world stage.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！	
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
为推进中非全面战略合作伙伴关系建设，中方愿在未来3年同非方重点实施“十大合作计划”，坚持政府指导、企业主体、市场运作、合作共赢的原则，着力支持非洲破解基础设施滞后、人才不足、资金短缺三大发展瓶颈，加快工业化和农业现代化进程，实现自主可持续发展。	
To build China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership, China will implement ten cooperation plans with Africa in the next three years. Guided by the principle of government guidance, businesses being the major actors, market operation and win-win cooperation, these plans aim at addressing three bottleneck issues holding back Africa's development, namely, inadequate infrastructure, lack of professional and skilled personnel, and funding shortage, accelerating Africa's industrialization and agricultural modernization, and achieving sustainable self-development.
一是中非工业化合作计划。中方将积极推进中非产业对接和产能合作，鼓励支持中国企业赴非洲投资兴业，合作新建或升级一批工业园区，向非洲国家派遣政府高级专家顾问。设立一批区域职业教育中心和若干能力建设学院，为非洲培训20万名职业技术人才，提供4万个来华培训名额。	
First, we will implement China-Africa industrialization plan. China will actively promote industry partnering and production capacity cooperation between China and Africa and encourage more Chinese enterprises to make business investment in Africa. China will build or upgrade a number of industrial parks in cooperation with Africa, send senior government experts and advisers to Africa and set up regional vocational education centers and schools for capacity building. China will also train 200,000 technical personnel and provide 40,000 training opportunities for African personnel in China.
二是中非农业现代化合作计划。中方将同非洲分享农业发展经验，转让农业适用技术，鼓励中国企业在非洲开展大规模种植、畜牧养殖、粮食仓储和加工，增加当地就业和农民收入。中方将在非洲100个乡村实施“农业富民工程”，派遣30批农业专家组赴非洲，建立中非农业科研机构“10+10”合作机制。中方高度关注非洲多个国家受厄尔尼诺现象影响致粮食歉收，将向受灾国家提供10亿元人民币紧急粮食援助。	
Second, we will implement China-Africa agricultural modernization plan. China will share its experience in agricultural development with Africa and transfer readily applicable technologies to it. We encourage Chinese enterprises to engage in large-scale farming, animal husbandry, and grain storage and processing in Africa to create more local jobs and increase farmers' income. China will carry out agricultural development projects in 100 African villages to raise rural living standards, send 30 teams of agricultural experts to Africa, and establish a "10+10" cooperation mechanism between Chinese and African agricultural research institutes. China is greatly concerned about the poor harvest caused by El Nino in many African countries and will provide RMB one billion of emergency food aid to the affected countries.
三是中非基础设施合作计划。中方将同非洲在基础设施规划、设计、建设、运营、维护等方面加强互利合作，支持中国企业积极参与非洲铁路、公路、区域航空、港口、电力、电信等基础设施建设，提升非洲可持续发展能力；支持非洲国家建设5所交通大学。	
Third, we will implement China-Africa infrastructure plan. China will step up mutually beneficial cooperation with Africa in infrastructure planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance. We support Chinese enterprises' active participation in Africa's infrastructural development, particularly in sectors such as railways, roads, regional aviation, ports, electricity and telecommunications, to enhance Africa's capacity for sustainable development. We will also support African countries in establishing five transportation universities.
四是中非金融合作计划。中方将同非洲国家扩大人民币结算和本币互换业务规模，鼓励中国金融机构赴非洲设立更多分支机构，以多种方式扩大对非洲投融资合作，为非洲工业化和现代化提供金融支持和服务。	
Fourth, we will implement China-Africa financial plan. China will expand its RMB settlement and currency swap operations with African countries, encourage Chinese financial institutions to set up more branches in Africa, and increase its investment and financing cooperation with Africa in multiple ways to provide financial support and services for Africa's industrialization and modernization drive.
五是中非绿色发展合作计划。中方将支持非洲增强绿色、低碳、可持续发展能力，支持非洲实施100个清洁能源和野生动植物保护项目、环境友好型农业项目和智慧型城市建设项目。中非合作绝不以牺牲非洲生态环境和长远利益为代价。	
Fifth, we will implement China-Africa green development plan. China will support Africa in bolstering its capacity for green, low-carbon and sustainable development and support Africa in launching 100 projects to develop clean energy, protect wildlife, promote environment-friendly agriculture and build smart cities. China-Africa cooperation will never be pursued at the expense of Africa's eco-system and long-term interests.
六是中非贸易和投资便利化合作计划。中方将实施50个促进贸易援助项目，支持非洲改善内外贸易和投资软硬条件，愿同非洲国家和区域组织商谈包括货物贸易、服务贸易、投资合作等全面自由贸易协定，扩大非洲输华产品规模。支持非洲国家提高海关、质检、税务等执法能力，开展标准化和认证认可、电子商务等领域合作。	
Sixth, we will implement China-Africa trade and investment facilitation plan. China will carry out 50 aid-for-trade programs to improve Africa's capacity, both "software" and "hardware", for conducting internal and external trade and investment. China is ready to negotiate with countries and regional organizations in Africa comprehensive free trade agreements covering trade in goods and services and investment cooperation and it will increase import of African products. China will support African countries in enhancing law enforcement capacity in areas such as customs, quality inspection and taxation. We will also engage in cooperation with Africa in standardization, certification and accreditation and e-commerce.
七是中非减贫惠民合作计划。中方将在加强自身减贫努力的同时，增加对非援助，在非洲实施200个“幸福生活工程”和以妇女儿童为主要受益者的减贫项目；免除非洲有关最不发达国家截至2015年年底到期未还的政府间无息贷款债务。	
Seventh, we will implement China-Africa poverty reduction plan. While intensifying its own poverty reduction efforts, China will increase its aid to Africa. We will carry out in Africa 200 "Happy Life" projects and poverty reduction programs focusing on women and children. We will cancel outstanding debts in the form of bilateral governmental zero-interest loans borrowed by the relevant least developed African countries that mature at the end of 2015.
八是中非公共卫生合作计划。中方将参与非洲疾控中心等公共卫生防控体系和能力建设；支持中非各20所医院开展示范合作，加强专业科室建设，继续派遣医疗队员、开展“光明行”、妇幼保健在内的医疗援助，为非洲提供一批复方青蒿素抗疟药品；鼓励支持中国企业赴非洲开展药品本地化生产，提高药品在非洲可及性。	
Eighth, we will implement China-Africa public health plan. China will help Africa strengthen its public health prevention and control system as well as its capacity building by participating in the building of the African Center for Disease Control. We will support pacesetting cooperation between 20 Chinese hospitals and 20 African hospitals, and upgrade hospital departments. We will continue to send medical teams to Africa and provide medical assistance such as the "Brightness Action" program for cataract patients and maternal and child care. We will provide more anti-malaria compound artemisinin to Africa, and encourage and support local drug production by Chinese enterprises in Africa to increase Africans' access to medicine.
九是中非人文合作计划。中方将为非洲援建5所文化中心，为非洲1万个村落实施收看卫星电视项目；为非洲提供2000个学历学位教育名额和3万个政府奖学金名额；每年组织200名非洲学者访华和500名非洲青年研修；每年培训1000名非洲新闻领域从业人员；支持开通更多中非直航航班，促进中非旅游合作。	
Ninth, we will implement China-Africa cultural and people-to-people plan. China will build five cultural centers in Africa and provide satellite TV reception to 10,000 African villages. We will provide to Africa 2,000 educational opportunities with diplomas or degrees and 30,000 government scholarships. Every year, we will sponsor visits by 200 African scholars and study trips by 500 young Africans to China, and train 1,000 media professionals from Africa. We support the opening of more direct flights between China and Africa to boost our tourism cooperation.
十是中非和平与安全合作计划。中方将向非盟提供6000万美元无偿援助，支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设和运作。中方将继续参与联合国在非洲维和行动；支持非洲国家加强国防、反恐、防暴、海关监管、移民管控等方面能力建设。	
Tenth, we will implement China-Africa peace and security plan. China will provide US$60 million of grant to support the building and operation of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for the Immediate Response to Crisis. China will continue to participate in UN peacekeeping missions in Africa and support African countries' capacity building in areas such as defense, counter-terrorism, riot prevention, customs and immigration control.
为确保“十大合作计划”顺利实施，中方决定提供总额600亿美元的资金支持，包括：提供50亿美元的无偿援助和无息贷款；提供350亿美元的优惠性质贷款及出口信贷额度，并提高优惠贷款优惠度；为中非发展基金和非洲中小企业发展专项贷款各增资50亿美元；设立首批资金100亿美元的“中非产能合作基金”。	
To ensure the successful implementation of these ten cooperation plans, China decides to provide a total of US$60 billion of funding support. It includes US$5 billion of grant and zero-interest loans; US$35 billion of loans of concessional nature on more favorable terms and export credit line; an increase of US$5 billion to the China-Africa Development Fund and the Special Loan for the Development of African SMEs respectively; and the China-Africa Fund for Production Capacity Cooperation with an initial contribution of US$10 billion.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！	
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
今年是中非合作论坛成立15周年。15年来，中非各领域务实合作成果丰硕。2014年中非贸易总额和中国对非洲非金融类投资存量分别是2000年的22倍和60倍，中国对非洲经济发展的贡献显著增长。中非合作论坛已经成为引领中非合作的一面旗帜，为南南合作树立了典范，成为带动国际社会加大对非洲关注和投入的先锋。	
This year marks the 15th anniversary of FOCAC. The past 15 years have seen fruitful progress in China-Africa practical cooperation across the board. Two-way trade and China's total non-financial investment in Africa in 2014 were 22 times and 60 times that of 2000 respectively, which shows China's contribution to Africa's economic development has risen significantly. FOCAC has become a pacesetter in China-Africa cooperation, an example in South-South cooperation, and a champion for greater international attention to and input in Africa.
当前，中非关系正处于历史上最好时期。我们应该登高望远、阔步前行。让我们携手努力，汇聚起中非24亿人民的智慧和力量，共同开启中非合作共赢、共同发展的新时代！
China-Africa relations have today reached a stage of growth unmatched in history. We should scale the heights, look afar and take bold steps. Let us join hands, pool the vision and strength of the 2.4 billion Chinese and Africans and open a new era of China-Africa win-win cooperation and common development.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!
80. 习近平G20杭州峰会开幕式致辞
构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济
Towards an Innovative, Invigorated, Interconnected and Inclusive World Economy
——习近平在G20峰会开幕式上的讲话
Statement on the Opening Ceremony by H.E. Xi Jinping
at the G20 Hangzhou Summit
中华人民共和国主席
President of the People’s Republic of China
2016年9月4日，杭州
Hangzhou, 4 September 2016Dear Colleagues,
各位同事：
The G20 Hangzhou Summit now begins.
我宣布，二十国集团领导人杭州峰会开幕！
It gives me great pleasure to meet you here in Hangzhou, and I wish to extend a warm welcome to you all.
很高兴同大家相聚杭州。首先，我谨对各位同事的到来，表示热烈欢迎！
The G20 Summit in Antalya last year was a big success. I wish to use this opportunity to thank Turkey once again for its outstanding job and the positive outcomes achieved during its presidency. Under the theme “Collective Action for Inclusive and Robust Growth”, Turkey brought about progress in inclusiveness, implementation and investment. China highly commends Turkey’s efforts on various fronts during its G20 presidency.
去年，二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会开得很成功。我也愿借此机会，再次感谢去年主席国土耳其的出色工作和取得的积极成果。土耳其以“共同行动以实现包容和稳健增长”作为峰会主题，从“包容、落实、投资”三方面推动产生成果，中国一直积极评价土耳其在担任主席国期间开展的各项工作。
Last November in Antalya, I talked to you about Hangzhou by quoting a Chinese saying, “Up in heaven, there is paradise; down on earth, there are Suzhou and Hangzhou.” And I said that I trust the Hangzhou Summit will be a unique setting where history is blended with modernity. I am glad you have accepted my invitation and come to Hangzhou. Present here are old and new friends of mine, and we will discuss ways to sustain global growth.
去年11月，我在安塔利亚向大家介绍，上有天堂，下有苏杭，相信杭州峰会将给大家呈现一种历史和现实交汇的独特韵味。今天，当时的邀请已经变成现实。在座的有老朋友，也有新朋友，大家齐聚杭州，共商世界经济发展大计。
In the next two days, under the theme of the Summit, we will have discussions on strengthening policy coordination, breaking a new path for growth, more effective and efficient global economic and financial governance, robust international trade and investment, inclusive and interconnected development, as well as other issues affecting the world economy.
未来两天，我们将围绕峰会主题，就加强宏观政策协调、创新增长方式，更高效的全球经济金融治理，强劲的国际贸易和投资，包容和联动式发展，影响世界经济的其他突出问题等议题展开讨论。
Eight years ago, at the height of the international financial crisis, the G20, acting in a spirit of unity and partnership, pulled the world economy back from the precipice and pushed it onto the track of stability and recovery. Thanks to this daring initiative, unity prevailed over differences and common good prevailed over selfish interests. The crisis focused global attention on the G20 and established it as the premier forum for international economic cooperation.
8年前，在国际金融危机最紧要关头，二十国集团临危受命，秉持同舟共济的伙伴精神，把正在滑向悬崖的世界经济拉回到稳定和复苏轨道。这是一次创举，团结战胜了分歧，共赢取代了私利。这场危机，让人们记住了二十国集团，也确立了二十国集团作为国际经济合作主要论坛的地位。
Today, eight years on, the global economy has again reached a critical juncture. The conventional engines driving global growth over the past decades, such as scientific and technological progress, population growth and economic globalization, have entered a transitional period, and their ability to stimulate global growth is notably weaker. The growth momentum generated by the last round of scientific and technological progress is diminishing, while the new round of scientific and industrial revolution has just started. Population aging is happening in all major economies, and the decline in population growth puts economic and social pressure on countries. Economic globalization is suffering setbacks, protectionism and inward-looking trends are on the rise, and the multilateral trading regime is under pressure. Despite notable progress made in financial regulatory reform, the risks of excessive leverage and bubbles continue to build up. To ensure that the financial market effectively meets the need of the real economy while maintaining stability remains a major challenge to the international community.
8年后的今天，世界经济又走到一个关键当口。科技进步、人口增长、经济全球化等过去数十年推动世界经济增长的主要引擎都先后进入换挡期，对世界经济的拉动作用明显减弱。上一轮科技进步带来的增长动能逐渐衰减，新一轮科技和产业革命尚未形成势头。主要经济体先后进入老龄化社会，人口增长率下降，给各国经济社会带来压力。经济全球化出现波折，保护主义、内顾倾向抬头，多边贸易体制受到冲击。金融监管改革虽有明显进展，但高杠杆、高泡沫等风险仍在积聚。如何让金融市场在保持稳定的同时有效服务实体经济，仍然是各国需要解决的重要课题。
Under the impact of all these factors, the global economy, while still on the road to recovery, faces multiple risks and challenges such as weak growth momentum, sluggish demand, volatility in the financial market and low growth in international trade and investment.
在这些因素综合作用下，世界经济虽然总体保持复苏态势，但面临增长动力不足、需求不振、金融市场反复动荡、国际贸易和投资持续低迷等多重风险和挑战。
The G20 consists of the world’s major economies. Its critical role and impact place the G20 at the forefront of the global efforts to tackle risks and challenges and expand the space of growth. The international community has great expectation for the G20 and places high hopes on the Hangzhou Summit. In response, we should find solutions to the problems we face through both individual and collective efforts. I hope the Hangzhou Summit will build on previous progress to provide a solution that addresses both the symptoms and root causes of the global economic problems and achieve strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive global growth.
二十国集团聚集了世界主要经济体，影响和作用举足轻重，也身处应对风险挑战、开拓增长空间的最前沿。国际社会对二十国集团充满期待，对这次峰会寄予厚望。我们需要通过各自行动和集体合力，直面问题，共寻答案。希望杭州峰会能够在以往的基础上，为世界经济开出一剂标本兼治、综合施策的药方，让世界经济走上强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长之路。
First, in the face of these challenges, we should strengthen macroeconomic policy coordination and jointly promote global growth and uphold international financial stability. The G20 members should pursue more comprehensive macroeconomic policies in keeping with their own national realities and employ various policy tools, including fiscal, monetary and structural reform policies, to expand aggregate global demand, improve the quality of supply and bolster the foundation of growth. We should, in conjunction with the formulation and implementation of the Hangzhou Action Plan, continue to strengthen policy coordination, reduce negative spillovers, and work together to uphold financial stability and boost market confidence.
第一，面对当前挑战，我们应该加强宏观经济政策协调，合力促进全球经济增长、维护金融稳定。二十国集团成员应该结合本国实际，采取更加全面的宏观经济政策，使用多种有效政策工具，统筹兼顾财政、货币、结构性改革政策，努力扩大全球总需求，全面改善供给质量，巩固经济增长基础。应该结合制定和落实《杭州行动计划》，继续加强政策协调，减少负面外溢效应，共同维护金融稳定，提振市场信心。
Second, in the face of these challenges, we should break a new path for growth and generate new growth momentum. The G20 should change its policy approach, and place equal importance on both short-term and medium- to long-term policies and both demand-side management and supply-side reform. This year, we have agreed on the G20 Blueprint on Innovative Growth and made the unanimous decision to break a new path and expand new frontier for the world economy through innovation, structural reform, new industrial revolution and the development of digital economy. We should stay committed to these initiatives to remove the root cause of sluggish recovery and weak growth that plagues the global economy, and lay a solid foundation for achieving a new round of global growth and prosperity.
第二，面对当前挑战，我们应该创新发展方式，挖掘增长动能。二十国集团应该调整政策思路，做到短期政策和中长期政策并重，需求侧管理和供给侧改革并重。今年，我们已经就《二十国集团创新增长蓝图》达成共识，一致决定通过创新、结构性改革、新工业革命、数字经济等新方式，为世界经济开辟新道路，拓展新边界。要沿着这一方向坚定走下去，帮助世界经济彻底摆脱复苏乏力、增长脆弱的局面，为世界经济迎来新一轮增长和繁荣打下坚实基础。
Third, in the face of these challenges, we should improve global economic governance and strengthen institutional safeguards. The G20 should continue to improve the international monetary and financial systems and the governance structure of international financial institutions and fully leverage the role of the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights. We should strengthen the global financial safety net, and enhance cooperation in financial regulation, international taxation and combating corruption to boost the resilience of the world economy against risks. This year, we have restarted the G20 International Financial Architecture Working Group. I hope that the working group will continue its work and become more effective.
第三，面对当前挑战，我们应该完善全球经济治理，夯实机制保障。二十国集团应该不断完善国际货币金融体系，优化国际金融机构治理结构，充分发挥国际货币基金组织特别提款权作用。应该完善全球金融安全网，加强在金融监管、国际税收、反腐败领域合作，提高世界经济抗风险能力。今年，我们重启了二十国集团国际金融架构工作组，希望继续向前推进，不断提高有效性。
Fourth, in the face of these challenges, we should build an open global economy and continue to promote facilitation and liberalization of trade and investment. Protectionism is like drinking poison to quench one’s thirst: It may ease a country’s internal pressure in the short term, but will only inflict severe damage to the country itself and the world economy in the long run. The G20 should resolutely oppose the beggar-thy-neighbor policy, and advocate and promote the building of an open global economy. We should honor our commitment of not adopting new protectionist measures, strengthen coordination and cooperation on investment policies and take credible steps to stimulate trade growth. Infrastructure connectivity should be enhanced so as to bring developing countries and small and medium-sized companies into the global value chain and make the global economy more open and integrated.
第四，面对当前挑战，我们应该建设开放型世界经济，继续推动贸易和投资自由化便利化。保护主义政策如饮鸩止渴，看似短期内能缓解一国内部压力，但从长期看将给自身和世界经济造成难以弥补的伤害。二十国集团应该坚决避免以邻为壑，做开放型世界经济的倡导者和推动者，恪守不采取新的保护主义措施的承诺，加强投资政策协调合作，采取切实行动促进贸易增长。我们应该发挥基础设施互联互通的辐射效应和带动作用，帮助发展中国家和中小企业深入参与全球价值链，推动全球经济进一步开放、交流、融合。
Fifth, in the face of these challenges, we should implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and promote inclusive development. To achieve common development is the shared aspiration of all peoples, especially those of the developing countries. According to the relevant statistics, the Gini coefficient has exceeded the widely-recognized alarm level of 0.6 and reached around 0.7 globally. This is something that we must pay close attention to. This year, development is high on the G20 agenda, and we have committed ourselves to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and formulated an action plan. We will also support industrialization in Africa and the least developed countries, expand energy access and improve energy efficiency, encourage more consumption of clean and renewable energy, promote financial inclusion and encourage the young people to start their own businesses. Through these means and more, we can reduce the inequality and imbalance in global development and deliver the benefits of global growth to people of all countries.
第五，面对当前挑战，我们应该落实2030年可持续发展议程，促进包容性发展。实现共同发展是各国人民特别是发展中国家人民的普遍愿望。据有关统计，现在世界基尼系数已经达到0.7左右，超过了公认的0.6“危险线”，必须引起我们的高度关注。今年，我们把发展置于二十国集团议程的突出位置，共同承诺积极落实2030年可持续发展议程，并制定了行动计划。同时，我们还将通过支持非洲和最不发达国家工业化、提高能源可及性、提高能效、加强清洁能源和可再生能源利用、发展普惠金融、鼓励青年创业等方式，减少全球发展不平等和不平衡，使各国人民共享世界经济增长成果。
Dear Colleagues,
各位同事！
The G20 carries high expectation of the international community and shoulders a heavy responsibility. We must ensure that the G20 fully plays its role of keeping the world economy on the track of prosperity and stability.
二十国集团承载着世界各国期待，使命重大。我们要努力把二十国集团建设好，为世界经济繁荣稳定把握好大方向。
First, the G20 must keep up with the changing times and lead the way forward. The G20 should adapt itself to the needs of the global economy and further transform itself from a mechanism of crisis response to one of long-term governance. When major issues emerge, the G20 has the responsibility to play a leading role and, with strategic vision, set the direction and blaze the trail for global growth.
第一，与时俱进，发挥引领作用。二十国集团应该根据世界经济需要，调整自身发展方向，进一步从危机应对向长效治理机制转型。面对重大突出问题，二十国集团有责任发挥领导作用，展现战略视野，为世界经济指明方向，开拓路径。
Second, the G20 should fully honor its commitment. As a Chinese saying puts it, one thousand promises do not count as much as one real action.We should make the G20 an action team instead of a talk shop. This year, we have formulated action plans for many areas such as sustainable development, green finance, energy efficiency and combating corruption, and each and every plan should be implemented.
第二，知行合一，采取务实行动。承诺一千，不如落实一件。我们应该让二十国集团成为行动队，而不是清谈馆。今年，我们在可持续发展、绿色金融、提高能效、反腐败等诸多领域制定了行动计划，要把每一项行动落到实处。
Third, the G20 should become a platform of cooperation built through joint efforts that delivers benefits to all.We should continue to strengthen the institutional building of the G20 to sustain and deepen our cooperation. We should solicit proposals for improvement and heed the views of all countries, especially the developing countries, so as to make the G20 more inclusive and better respond to the demand of people of different countries.
第三，共建共享，打造合作平台。我们应该继续加强二十国集团机制建设，确保合作延续和深入。广纳良言，充分倾听世界各国特别是发展中国家声音，使二十国集团工作更具包容性，更好回应各国人民诉求。
Fourth, the G20 should stick together as partners in meeting challenges. Partnership is the most valuable asset of the G20. The G20 countries differ in national conditions, stages of development and face different challenges. But we all share a common goal of pursuing stronger growth, meeting challenges and achieving common development. So long as we stick together, we can navigate the heavy waves of the global economy and sail towards a future of growth.
第四，同舟共济，发扬伙伴精神。伙伴精神是二十国集团最宝贵的财富。我们虽然国情不同、发展阶段不同、面临的现实挑战不同，但推动经济增长的愿望相同，应对危机挑战的利益相同，实现共同发展的憧憬相同。只要我们坚持同舟共济的伙伴精神，就能够克服世界经济的惊涛骇浪，开辟未来增长的崭新航程。
Dear Colleagues,
各位同事！
In preparing for the Hangzhou Summit, China has followed the principle of openness, transparency and inclusiveness, and maintained close contact and coordination with all other members. We have also held dialogue of various forms with the United Nations, the African Union, the G77, the least developed countries, landlocked countries and small island states to brief them and all the people who show an interest in the G20 on our preparation. We have listened to the views and proposals of various parties and benefited greatly from them in making preparation for the Hangzhou Summit.
在杭州峰会筹备过程中，中国始终秉持开放、透明、包容的办会理念，同各成员保持密切沟通和协调。我们还举办了各种形式的外围对话，走进联合国，走进非盟总部，走进七十七国集团，走进最不发达国家、内陆国、小岛国，向世界各国，以及所有关心二十国集团的人们介绍杭州峰会筹备情况，倾听各方利益诉求。各方提出的意见和建议对这次峰会的筹备都发挥了重要作用。
I hope that during discussions in the coming two days, we will pool our vision and create synergy so as to enable the Hangzhou Summit to fulfill its mandate of boosting global growth, strengthening international economic cooperation and promoting the future growth of the G20.
我期待在接下来两天的讨论中，我们能够集众智、聚合力，努力让杭州峰会实现促进世界经济增长、加强国际经济合作、推动二十国集团发展的目标。
Let’s make Hangzhou a new departure point and steer the giant ship of the global economy on a new voyage from the shore of the Qiantang River to the vast ocean.
让我们以杭州为新起点，引领世界经济的航船，从钱塘江畔再次扬帆启航，驶向更加广阔的大海！
Thank you!
谢谢大家。
79. 习近平G20杭州峰会闭幕式致辞
习主席在二十国集团领导人
杭州峰会上的闭幕辞
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Closing Ceremony of 
the G20 Hangzhou Summit
各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
我们用了一天半的时间，围绕会议主题和重点议题进行了热烈而富有成果的讨论，就加强政策协调、创新增长方式，全球经济金融治理，国际贸易和投资，包容和联动式发展等议题，以及影响世界经济的其他突出问题，深入交换看法，达成许多重要共识。
Over the past one and a half days, we have had intensive and productive discussions on the key agenda items under the theme of the Summit. We had an in-depth exchange of views on strengthening policy coordination, breaking a new path for growth, more effective and efficient global economic and financial governance, robust international trade and investment, inclusive and interconnected development and other issues affecting the world economy, and reached important consensus in many areas.
第一，我们决心为世界经济指明方向，规划路径。我们认为，当前世界经济增长仍然乏力，增长动力不足，国际和地区热点问题以及全球性挑战对世界经济的影响不容忽视。维护世界和平稳定，为促进全球经济增长创造良好环境至关重要。我们要继续加强宏观政策沟通和协调，发扬同舟共济、合作共赢的伙伴精神，凝聚共识，形成合力，促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。我们通过了《二十国集团领导人杭州峰会公报》，进一步明确了二十国集团合作的发展方向、目标、举措，就推动世界经济增长达成了杭州共识，为构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济描绘了愿景。
First, we are determined to point the way and set the course for the world economy. We share the view that the world economic recovery remains weak, weighed down by insufficient drivers of growth and negative impact of regional and international hot-spots and global challenges. It is crucial to maintain peace and stability and foster an enabling environment for world economic development. We will further strengthen macro-policy dialogue and coordination, work in the spirit of partnership to promote mutual help and win-win cooperation, and concentrate our minds and energy to pursue strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth. We have adopted the G20 Leaders’ Communiqué of the Hangzhou Summit. It sets out the direction, goals and steps for G20 cooperation, embodies the Hangzhou Consensus for growth, and provides the blueprint for building an innovative, invigorated, interconnected and inclusive world economy. 
我们认为，面对当前世界经济的风险和挑战，需要标本兼治，综合施策，运用好财政、货币、结构性改革等多种有效政策工具，既要做好短期风险防范和应对，也要挖掘中长期增长潜力；既要保持总需求力度，也要改善供给质量。这将向国际社会传递二十国集团成员共促全球经济增长的积极信号，有助于提振市场信心，维护全球金融市场稳定。
We believe that addressing the risks and challenges to today’s world economy requires multi-pronged solution to tackle both the symptoms and the root causes. A host of effective policy tools, fiscal, monetary and structural, must be leveraged to sharpen vigilance and buffer against short-term risks, unleash medium- to long-term potential, ensure sufficient aggregate demand, and improve the quality of supply. This will send a strong signal of G20’s commitment to global growth, and will go a long way to shoring up market confidence and ensuring stability of global financial markets. 
第二，我们决心创新增长方式，为世界经济注入新动力。我们一致通过了《二十国集团创新增长蓝图》，决心从根本上寻找世界经济持续健康增长之道，紧紧抓住创新、新工业革命、数字经济等新要素新业态带来的新机遇，并制定一系列具体行动计划。我们支持以科技创新为核心，带动发展理念、体制机制、商业模式等全方位、多层次、宽领域创新，推动创新成果交流共享。我们决定大力推进结构性改革，制定了优先领域、指导原则、指标体系。《二十国集团创新增长蓝图》的达成，将使我们在理念上有共识、行动上有计划、机制上有保障，有助于为全球增长开辟新路径，全面提升世界经济中长期增长潜力。　　
Second, we are determined to break a new path for growth and instill new dynamism into the world economy. We have unanimously adopted the G20 Blueprint on Innovative Growth. It reflects our desire to find the right pathway toward sustained and healthy growth of the world economy, capitalize on the new opportunities brought about by innovation, the new industrial revolution, digital economy and other new factors and business types, and flesh out a series of specific action plans. We agree to encourage multi-leveled innovation in a wide range of domains, including development concepts, institutional architecture and business models, with science and technology innovation at the core. We also believe that fruits of innovation should be shared. We decide to forge ahead with structural reform and have identified the priority areas, guiding principles and a set of indicators. The Blueprint provides us with the consensus, action plan and the overall framework to open up a new path for global growth and increase medium- to long-term potential of the world economy.
第三，我们决心完善全球经济金融治理，提高世界经济抗风险能力。我们同意继续推动国际金融机构份额和治理结构改革，扩大特别提款权的使用，强化全球金融安全网，提升国际货币体系稳定性和韧性。我们决心加强落实各项金融改革举措，密切监测和应对金融体系潜在风险和脆弱性，深化普惠金融、绿色金融、气候资金领域合作，共同维护国际金融市场稳定。我们决定深化国际税收合作，通过税收促进全球投资和增长。我们就能源可及性、可再生能源、能效共同制定了行动计划，以提升全球能源治理有效性。我们就继续深化反腐败合作达成多项共识，决心让腐败分子在二十国乃至全球更大范围无处藏身、无所遁形。我们期待通过上述成果和举措，全面提升全球经济金融治理结构的平衡性、机制的可靠性、行动的有效性，为世界经济增长保驾护航。
Third, we are determined to improve global economic and financial governance to enhance the resilience of the world economy. We agree to advance the quota and governance reform of international financial institutions, broaden the use of SDR, strengthen the Global Financial Safety Net and make the international monetary system more stable and resilient. We resolve to implement various financial reforms, closely monitor and address the underlying risks and vulnerability of the financial system, deepen cooperation on financial inclusion, green financing and climate fund, and jointly maintain stability in international financial markets. We will enhance international tax cooperation as a means to promote global investment and growth. To transform the global energy governance, we have formulated an action plan on energy access, renewable energy and energy efficiency. On corruption, we have reached further consensus on deepening cooperation and are determined to deprive all corrupt elements of any safe haven in G20 countries and beyond. We hope the above progress and measures will lead to more balanced global economic and financial governance, well-functioning institutions and effective actions that will secure world economic growth.  
第四，我们决心重振国际贸易和投资这两大引擎的作用，构建开放型世界经济。我们同意充分发挥贸易部长会和贸易投资工作组的作用。我们共同制定《二十国集团全球贸易增长战略》，促进包容协调的全球价值链发展，继续支持多边贸易体制，重申反对保护主义承诺，以释放全球经贸合作潜力，扭转全球贸易增长下滑趋势。我们制定了《二十国集团全球投资指导原则》，这是全球首个多边投资规则框架，填补了国际投资领域空白。期待在我们共同努力下，在强劲的国际贸易和投资推动下，世界经济将重新焕发活力，经济全球化进程将继续蓬勃发展。
Fourth, we are determined to revitalize international trade and investment as key engines of growth, and build an open world economy. We agree to fully leverage the role of the Trade Ministers’ Meeting and the Trade and Investment Working Group. We have worked out the G20 Strategy for Global Trade Growth to promote the inclusive and coordinated development of global value chains, provide continued support for the multilateral trading system, and reiterate the commitment to reject protectionism, in a joint endeavor to unlock the potential of global trade cooperation and reverse the decline of global trade growth. We have formulated the G20 Guiding Principles for Global Investment Policymaking, which lays out the first global framework of multilateral rules governing international investment. With these common efforts, we have reasons to look forward to renewed vitality of the world economy and continued robust advancement of economic globalization driven by strong international trade and investment.
第五，我们决心推动包容和联动式发展，让二十国集团合作成果惠及全球。我们第一次把发展问题置于全球宏观政策框架的突出位置，第一次就落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程制定行动计划，具有开创性意义。我们同意在落实气候变化《巴黎协定》方面发挥表率作用，推动《巴黎协定》尽早生效。我们发起《二十国集团支持非洲和最不发达国家工业化倡议》，制定创业行动计划，发起《全球基础设施互联互通联盟倡议》，决定在粮食安全、包容性商业等领域深化合作。这些行动计划和务实成果，将着力减少全球发展不平等、不平衡问题，为发展中国家人民带来实实在在的好处，为实现2030年可持续发展目标作出重要努力，为全人类共同发展贡献力量。
Fifth, we are determined to promote inclusive and interconnected development, so that G20 cooperation will deliver benefits to the whole world. For the first time, we have given priority to development in the global macro-policy framework. For the first time, we have devised a groundbreaking Action Plan on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We agree to take the lead in implementing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change to encourage its early entry into effect. We have proposed the G20 Initiative on Supporting Industrialization in Africa and LDCs, made an Entrepreneurship Action Plan, adopted the Global Infrastructure Connectivity Alliance Initiative, and decided to deepen cooperation in such areas as food security and inclusive business. These action plans and practical outcomes will help reduce inequality and imbalance in global development, deliver tangible benefits to people of the developing world, make important progress toward realizing the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030, and contribute to the common development of mankind. 
我们认识到发挥好二十国集团国际经济合作主要论坛作用的重要性，认为二十国集团有必要进一步从危机应对机制向长效治理机制转型，从侧重短期政策向短中长期政策并重转型。我们认为，二十国集团的发展关乎所有成员切身利益，也牵动世界经济发展的未来，只有顺应变革，与时俱进，才能永葆生机。我们决心合力支持二十国集团继续聚焦世界经济面临的最突出、最重要、最紧迫的挑战，加强政策协调，完善机制建设，扎实落实成果，引领世界经济实现强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长。
We have come to a deeper understanding of the importance of making full use of the role of the G20 as the premier forum for international economic cooperation and deem it necessary to transform the G20 from a crisis response mechanism to a long-term governance mechanism and expand its focus from short-term policy response to a combination of short-, medium- and long-term policymaking. We all believe that the development of the G20 bears on the immediate interests of all members and the future of the world economy. Only when the G20 stays responsive to time and change can it retain its vigor and vitality. We resolve to support the continued focus by the G20 on the most prominent, pivotal and pressing challenges facing the world economy, enhance policy coordination, improve institutional building, and fully implement the outcomes, thus leading strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth of the world economy. 
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues, 
在我正式宣布会议结束之前，我想向大家表示诚挚谢意。感谢你们对我本人和中国政府的信任，感谢你们在会议期间给予中方的支持、理解、合作，感谢你们为推动世界经济增长和二十国集团发展付出的辛勤努力和作出的重要贡献。
Before I formally announce the conclusion of the summit, let me extend my sincere thanks to all of you for your trust in me and the Chinese government, for the support, understanding and cooperation you have rendered China during the summit, and for the hard work and important contribution you have made to facilitate world economic growth and the development of the G20. 
在我们共同努力下，二十国集团领导人杭州峰会取得了丰硕成果，画上了圆满句号。我深信，这次会议将成为一个崭新起点，让二十国集团从杭州再出发。
Thanks to our joint efforts, the G20 Hangzhou Summit has produced fruitful results and is successfully concluded. I am convinced that Hangzhou will be a fresh starting point for the G20 to embark on a new journey. 
相聚美好而又短暂，很快到了我们要说再见的时候。会议结束后，我将参加记者招待会，根据我们在会上达成的共识，向媒体简要介绍会议成果和讨论情况。有些同事还要在中国逗留几天，有些同事很快将离开中国。我希望这次中国之行和西湖风光能给大家留下美好的回忆，也愿借此机会祝大家旅途愉快，一路平安！
Ours has been a short but memorable gathering. It is about time to say goodbye. In a moment, I will meet the press and brief them on the outcomes of the summit and our deliberations in light of the consensus we have reached. Some colleagues will stay in China for a few more days. Others are departing soon. I hope you will take back fond memories from your trip to China, including the beautiful scenery of the West Lake. I wish all of you a pleasant and safe journey home. 
最后，我宣布，二十国集团领导人杭州峰会闭幕！
I now declare the G20 Hangzhou Summit closed. 
谢谢大家。         　　
Thank you.
17. 习近平主席在中缅建交70周年系列庆祝活动暨中缅文化旅游年启动仪式上的致辞
Remarks at Launch Ceremony of Celebrations for the 70th Anniversary of China-Myanmar Diplomatic Relations & the China-Myanmar Year of Culture and Tourism
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
2020年1月17日，内比都
Nay Pyi Taw, 17 January 2020
尊敬的温敏总统，
尊敬的昂山素季国务资政，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellency President U Win Myint,
Your Excellency State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
敏格拉巴！
Mingalaba! (Nice to meet you!)
新年伊始，贵国刚刚庆祝了独立节，中国的春节即将到来，我在这吉祥如意的时刻访问贵国，特别是今晚同大家欢聚一堂，感到分外亲切。首先，我代表中国政府和中国人民，向缅甸社会各界和缅甸人民，致以诚挚的问候和节日的祝福。
This is the start of the new year. Myanmar has just celebrated its Independence Day and China will soon have its Spring Festival. It warms my heart to visit Myanmar at such an auspicious time and join all of you in this delightful gathering tonight. On behalf of the Chinese government and people, let me first extend our best regards and new year greetings to people from across sectors in Myanmar.
刚才，温敏总统和昂山素季国务资政发表了热情洋溢的讲话。接下来，我们将共同启动中缅建交70周年庆祝活动和中缅文化旅游年。这是中缅友好交往光辉历程的重要历史印记，也是两国人民的华彩盛事，我很高兴同大家一起见证这个历史时刻。
Just now, we have heard the warm and gracious remarks from President U Win Myint and State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. In a moment, we will jointly launch celebrations for the 70th anniversary of China-Myanmar diplomatic relations and for the China-Myanmar Year of Culture and Tourism. This is an important landmark in the long history of our friendly exchanges, one that will be celebrated with great festivity by our two peoples. I am truly delighted to join you in witnessing this historic moment.
中缅山水相连，两国人民友好交往跨越千年，绵延不断。不论是秦汉时期南方丝绸之路上的互通有无，骠国王子出使盛唐交流歌舞艺术，还是上个世纪双方携手反抗殖民主义、帝国主义，都体现了双方心意相通、患难与共的深厚底蕴和宝贵传统。
China and Myanmar are neighbors connected by shared mountains and rivers, and our people have enjoyed friendly ties for thousands of years. About 2,000 years ago during China’s Qin and Han Dynasties, the two sides traded with each other along the southern Silk Road. At the heyday of the Tang Dynasty in the early 9th century, the Prince of Pyu led a dancing and music troupe to China and became an emissary of China-Myanmar friendship. In the last century, the two sides fought shoulder to shoulder against colonialism and imperialism. These examples reflect the profound friendship between us and testify to our great tradition of sharing weal and woe.
中缅文化都讲一个“缘”字。两国地缘相近、人缘相亲、文缘相通，胞波情谊历经千年始终如一，是双边关系发展的动力和源泉。双方要通过办好建交庆祝活动，增进文明互鉴，密切人文交流，多为两国老百姓办实事、办好事，为中缅友好事业培养更多参与者、受益者、支持者，筑牢两国友好社会基础。
Both Chinese and Myanmar cultures cherish the belief in a “shared bond”. Our two countries are geographically linked, our peoples are connected by kinship and our cultures enjoy a natural affinity. Our millennia-old, time-tested “pauk-phaw” friendship is as strong as ever; it is the driving force and source of strength behind China-Myanmar relations. By celebrating 70 years of diplomatic ties, the two sides may increase mutual learning as civilizations, expand people-to-people exchanges, and deliver solid results and real benefits to our peoples. This will engage more people in China and Myanmar who will become stakeholders, beneficiaries and supporters of China-Myanmar friendship, thus cementing public support for our friendly ties.
文化和民风是一个国家的名片。我11年前曾访问过贵国，举世闻名的仰光大金塔、淳朴友好的当地民众、绚丽多彩的文化风俗，都给我留下深刻而美好的印象。再次到访内比都，这里依旧宁静祥和，生机盎然。相信随着中缅文化旅游年的启动，会有越来越多的中国民众来到缅甸，领略这里传承千年的美丽图卷。
Culture and people make a country known to the world. My last visit to Myanmar was 11 years ago. The renowned Golden Pagoda in Yangon, the warmth and hospitality of the people, and the diverse cultures and customs all left me a fond memory. Coming back this time, I see that Nay Pyi Taw is as tranquil and serene, and is just as vibrant a city. With the launch of the China-Myanmar Year of Culture and Tourism, I am sure more and more Chinese will come to Myanmar and be amazed by the beauty of this millennia-old civilization.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
历史的车轮滚滚向前。新时代推进中缅关系，要继往开来、守正创新。我同温敏总统一致同意以这次访问为起点，共同构建中缅命运共同体。这一重要政治共识，深刻诠释了中缅两国唇齿相依、休戚与共的特殊关系，生动体现了两国人民患难与共、守望相助的兄弟情谊，全面擘画了双边关系未来发展的崭新蓝图。
History moves on and takes us forward. To advance China-Myanmar relations in the new era, we need to build on past achievements, stay true to our shared ideals and blaze a new trail together. President U Win Myint and I have agreed that my visit shall mark the start of our joint endeavor to build a China-Myanmar community with a shared future. This important political consensus speaks volumes about the special bond between China and Myanmar, a bond as close as between lips and teeth. It gives vivid expression to the fraternal friendship between our peoples who have supported each other through thick and thin, and draws up a new and overarching blueprint for future growth of bilateral ties.
2020年对中缅两国和双边关系而言，都是有重要意义的一年。中国将决胜全面建成小康社会、决战脱贫攻坚。缅甸将举行新一届大选，国家发展建设进入新的时期。中缅关系已进入新时代，双方要以构建中缅命运共同体为遵循，以两国人民根本利益为重，夯实政治互信，扩大务实合作，密切人文交流，使两国人民永做好邻居、好朋友、好胞波、好伙伴。
The year 2020 is of great significance for China, for Myanmar and for our relations. This year, China will become a moderately prosperous society in all respects and win victory over the battle against poverty; Myanmar will hold a general election and enter a new phase of national development. This year also marks the beginning of a new era for China-Myanmar relations. Guided by the shared vision of a China-Myanmar community with a shared future and by the fundamental interests of our peoples, we must pursue stronger political trust, broader practical cooperation and closer cultural exchanges, so that the two peoples will forever be good neighbors, good friends, good pauk-phaw and good partners.
刚才，我参观了庆祝中缅建交70周年图片展，其中有一张周恩来总理1954年6月28日至29日访问缅甸的照片，那时候，中国和印度、缅甸分别发表联合声明，共同倡导和平共处五项原则。这是国际关系史上的重大创举。
A few moments ago, I watched a photo exhibition marking the 70th anniversary of China-Myanmar diplomatic relations. I was particularly struck by a photo of Premier Zhou Enlai visiting Myanmar from June 28 to 29 in 1954. In that visit to Myanmar and India, China and the two countries issued joint statements to initiate the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. These Five Principles have made a major contribution to the history of international relations.
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局，国际社会日益成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体，但国际关系中不公正不平等现象仍很突出，维护世界和平、促进共同发展，依然任重道远。新形势下，和平共处五项原则不仅没有过时，反而历久弥新。中方愿同缅方一道，做弘扬和践行和平共处五项原则的表率，树立国家间交往的典范，推动国际社会携手构建人类命运共同体。
The world today is undergoing deep changes not seen in a century. Countries are closely linked and are increasingly becoming a community with a shared future. Yet, the lack of equality and justice is still prominent in international relations. To safeguard world peace and promote common development remains a challenging goal. Under new circumstances, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence are more relevant than ever before. China and Myanmar, working together, can set an example for advocating and applying the Five Principles and be role models in the handling of state-to-state relations. Together, we can encourage all to join the efforts for building a community with a shared future for mankind.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
上个世纪60年代，中国的陈毅元帅曾赋诗道：“胞波感情重，江水溯源长。”我相信，在双方共同努力下，中缅友好交往和合作发展的历史潮流，一定会像同宗同源的中国澜沧江和缅甸伊洛瓦底江一样，跨过崇山峻岭，越过激流险滩，始终奔腾向前。
In the 1960s, Marshal Chen Yi, once China’s foreign minister, wrote that “deep are the feelings of pauk-phaw, just as long is the flow of our rivers.” I am convinced that with joint efforts, the tide of China-Myanmar friendship and cooperation for common development will surge forward, like the Lancang and the Irrawaddy, coming from the same origin and rushing past mountains and shoals, in unstoppable flows.
最后，我衷心祝愿，
Let me conclude with a wish from the bottom of my heart –
中缅友好万古长青！
Long live China-Myanmar friendship!
13. 习近平在2020年中国国际服务贸易交易会全球服务贸易峰会上的致辞
（2020年9月4日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Global Trade in Services Summit of
The 2020 China International Fair for Trade in Services
Beijing, 4 September 2020
尊敬的各国领导人，
尊敬的各位国际组织负责人，
尊敬的各代表团团长，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Leaders of Participating Countries,
Your Excellencies Heads of International Organizations,
Your Excellencies Heads of Delegation,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
大家好！值此2020年中国国际服务贸易交易会举办之际，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对参与本次大会的线上线下所有嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！对世界各地的新老朋友们，表示诚挚的问候和美好的祝愿！
Good evening! As the 2020 China International Fair for Trade in Services (CIFTIS) opens, I wish to extend, on behalf of the government and people of China and in my own name, a hearty welcome to all the guests attending in person or via the Internet! To the many old and new friends from across the world, I give you my warmest greetings and best wishes!
在过去的几个月里，中国人民同各国人民一道，相互支持、相互帮助，共同为抗击新冠肺炎疫情、应对疫情带来的全球性挑战作出了艰苦努力。当前，全球范围疫情尚未得到全面控制，各国都面临着抗疫情、稳经济、保民生的艰巨任务。在这一背景下，中国克服重重困难，举办这样一场重大国际经贸活动，就是要同大家携手努力、共克时艰，共同促进全球服务贸易发展繁荣，推动世界经济尽快复苏。
Over the past few months, the people of China and other countries have supported and helped each other in a tenacious fight against COVID-19 and the global challenges that have come with it. Today, with COVID-19 yet to be brought under full control at the global level, all countries face the formidable task to defeat the virus, stabilize the economy, and protect livelihoods. It is against such a backdrop that China decided to hold this important international trade event despite many difficulties in preparation. It shows China's willingness to join hands with all of you in this trying time and work together to enable global trade in services to thrive and the world economy to recover at an early date.
中国国际服务贸易交易会，是专门为服务贸易搭建的国家级、国际性、综合型大规模展会和交易平台，自2012年起，已举办6届。本届中国国际服务贸易交易会以“全球服务，互惠共享”为主题。希望以此为契机，搭建起平台和桥梁，让各国人民充分展示服务贸易领域新发展新突破，共同享受人类社会发展进步新技术新成果。我们期待与会嘉宾深入交流、加强合作，为深化服务贸易和投资合作、增强经济社会发展活力贡献智慧和力量。
CIFTIS is a large exhibition and trading platform dedicated to trade in services. This comprehensive, state-level event with a global reach has already been held six times since 2012. We hope that this year's CIFTIS, held under the theme of "Global Services, Shared Prosperity", will present an opportunity and serve as a platform and a bridge for people from across the world to fully showcase the new progress and breakthroughs in services trade and share in the new technologies and benefits of human progress. We hope that through in-depth exchanges and closer cooperation, delegates participating in the event could contribute your wisdom and energy to deepening cooperation on trade and investment in services and invigorating economic and social development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局。新冠肺炎疫情全球大流行使这个大变局加速变化，经济全球化遭遇逆流，保护主义、单边主义上升，世界经济低迷，国际贸易和投资大幅萎缩，给人类生产生活带来前所未有的挑战和考验。
Our world is going through profound changes unseen in a century, and the COVID-19 pandemic is accelerating such changes. Economic globalization has run up against headwinds; protectionism and unilateralism are on the rise; the world economy is in the doldrums; and international trade and investment have slumped. Such are the unprecedented challenges and tests in the work and life of mankind.
同时，我们也要看到，近年来，新一轮科技革命和产业变革孕育兴起，带动了数字技术强势崛起，促进了产业深度融合，引领了服务经济蓬勃发展。这次疫情全球大流行期间，远程医疗、在线教育、共享平台、协同办公、跨境电商等服务广泛应用，对促进各国经济稳定、推动国际抗疫合作发挥了重要作用。放眼未来，服务业开放合作正日益成为推动发展的重要力量。
That said, let us not forget that a new round of technological and industrial revolution in recent years has spurred a boom in digital technologies, deepened the integration of industries, and allowed the service economy to flourish. During this pandemic, certain services have been widely used: telemedicine, e-learning, sharing platforms, collaboration systems, and cross-border e-commerce, to name just a few. They have played an important part in ensuring economic stability in individual countries and promoting international cooperation against COVID-19. Going forward, open cooperation in the services sector will become an increasingly important driver for development.
借此机会，我愿提出3点倡议。
Here, I would like to take this opportunity to share with you the following three thoughts and suggestions.
第一，共同营造开放包容的合作环境。纵观人类社会发展史，世界经济开放则兴，封闭则衰。服务业因其独特的轻资产、软要素等特点，更加需要开放、透明、包容、非歧视的行业发展生态，更加需要各国努力减少制约要素流动的“边境上”和“边境后”壁垒，推动跨境互联互通。中国将坚定不移扩大对外开放，建立健全跨境服务贸易负面清单管理制度，推进服务贸易创新发展试点开放平台建设，继续放宽服务业市场准入，主动扩大优质服务进口。中国将积极顺应服务贸易发展实际需要，推动多边、区域等层面服务规则协调，不断完善全球经济治理，促进世界经济包容性增长。
First, let us work together to foster an open and inclusive environment for cooperation. A review of human history shows that the world economy thrives in openness and withers in seclusion. The services sector is unique as it is asset-light but heavy in soft factors of production. As such, it requires, more than other sectors, an open, transparent, inclusive and non-discriminatory environment for businesses to grow. It calls for the concerted efforts of all countries to reduce border and behind-the-border barriers constraining the flow of production factors and promote cross-border connectivity. China will remain steadfast in opening up wider to the world. We will continue to work on a negative list system for managing cross-border services trade. We will develop open platforms for the pilot program of innovative development of the services sector. We will further ease market access for the services sector, and will take greater initiative to increase imports of quality services. To meet the actual needs for growing trade in services, China will promote greater harmonization of rules for the services sector at the multilateral and regional levels, and work for continued improvement in global economic governance and more inclusive growth of the world economy.
第二，共同激活创新引领的合作动能。我们要顺应数字化、网络化、智能化发展趋势，共同致力于消除“数字鸿沟”，助推服务贸易数字化进程。中国将拓展特色服务出口基地，发展服务贸易新业态新模式。中国愿同各国一道，加强宏观政策协调，加快数字领域国际合作，加大知识产权保护，积极促进数字经济、共享经济等蓬勃发展，推动世界经济不断焕发生机活力。
Second, let us work together to unleash the power of innovation in driving cooperation forward. We need to adapt to the trend towards digital-driven, Internet-based and smart growth, jointly eliminate the "digital divide", and advance digitalization of trade in services. China will continue to build bases for featured services export and develop new business forms and models in services trade. China will work with other countries to enhance macro policy coordination, accelerate international cooperation in the digital sector, step up intellectual property protection, and facilitate the vibrant growth of the digital economy and sharing economy. Such efforts will generate renewed dynamism for the world economy.
第三，共同开创互利共赢的合作局面。经济全球化背景下，各国经济彼此依存，利益交融前所未有，以诚相待、普惠共享是根本之计。各国要加强服务贸易发展对接，创新合作方式，深化合作领域，积极寻求发展利益最大公约数，不断做大“蛋糕”。中国将充分利用中国国际服务贸易交易会、中国国际进口博览会等各类平台，推动开展政策和经验交流，建立和培育政府间、国际组织、商协会及企业间多样化伙伴关系，支持组建全球服务贸易联盟，不断形成更多务实合作成果，使各国人民共同享有服务贸易增长成果。
Third, let us work together to promote mutually beneficial cooperation. In this age of economic globalization, countries share economic interdependency and intertwined interests like never before. To treat each other with sincerity and pursue shared benefits holds the key to state-to-state relations in today's world. Countries need to forge greater synergy in growing their trade in services, seek new ways and more areas of cooperation, and look for the widest possible converging interests in development so as to make the "pie" bigger and bigger. China will make full use of CIFTIS and other platforms such as the China International Import Expo to promote policy exchange and experience-sharing, and foster diverse partnerships with foreign governments, international organizations, business associations and enterprises. China supports the establishment of a global alliance for trade in services. We hope to see more fruits from our practical cooperation so that people in different countries will all benefit from a growing trade in services.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
为更好发挥北京在中国服务业开放中的引领作用，我们将支持北京打造国家服务业扩大开放综合示范区，加大先行先试力度，探索更多可复制可推广经验；设立以科技创新、服务业开放、数字经济为主要特征的自由贸易试验区，构建京津冀协同发展的高水平开放平台，带动形成更高层次改革开放新格局。
To better leverage Beijing's role in spearheading the opening-up of China's services sector, we will support the municipality in developing a national integrated demonstration zone for greater openness in the services sector. It will enable Beijing to take bigger, bolder steps as a trailblazer and gain more experience that would be replicable and scalable. We will also support Beijing in setting up a pilot free trade zone characterizing scientific and technological innovation, opening-up of the services sector, and digital economy. It will serve as a platform of high-standard opening-up for the coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region, and open up new horizons for reform and opening-up at a higher level.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情，在一段时间内阻隔了我们的相聚，但阻挡不了服务贸易发展的脚步，阻断不了我们携手共进、合作共赢的信心和行动！让我们齐心协力、携手前行，以坚定的步伐走出人类历史上这段艰难时期，共同迎接世界更加美好的未来！
The sudden attack of COVID-19 may have prevented us from meeting face to face, but it cannot block the growth of trade in services. Nor will it affect our confidence and action as we pursue shared progress and mutually beneficial cooperation. Let us pull together and strengthen our resolve to get over this difficult period for mankind. Let us move to embrace a better tomorrow for the world.
最后，预祝会议取得圆满成功！
To conclude, I wish CIFTIS a great success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
3. 习近平在G20领导人利雅得峰会“守护地球”主题边会上的致辞
在二十国集团领导人利雅得峰会“守护地球”主题边会上的致辞
（2020年11月22日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Leaders' Side Event on Safeguarding the Planet of
The G20 Riyadh Summit
22 November 2020
各位同事，
朋友们：
Dear Colleagues,
Friends,
地球是我们的共同家园。我们要秉持人类命运共同体理念，携手应对气候环境领域挑战，守护好这颗蓝色星球。在此，我愿分享几点看法。
The Earth is our shared home. We may follow the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind and pitch in to tackle climate and other environmental challenges and protect the blue planet. Let me share with you my thoughts on what G20 could do:
第一，加大应对气候变化力度。二十国集团要继续发挥引领作用，在《联合国气候变化框架公约》指导下，推动应对气候变化《巴黎协定》全面有效实施。不久前，我宣布中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，力争二氧化碳排放2030年前达到峰值，2060年前实现碳中和。中国言出必行，将坚定不移加以落实。
First, we could strengthen our response to climate change. G20 should continue to take the lead in tackling climate change. We need to follow the guidance of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and push for the full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement. Not long ago, I announced China's initiative to scale up its nationally determined contributions and strive to peak carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. China will honor its commitment and see the implementation through.
第二，深入推进清洁能源转型。中方赞赏沙特提出碳循环经济理念，支持后疫情时代能源低碳转型，实现人人享有可持续能源目标。中国建成了全球最大的清洁能源系统，新能源汽车产销量连续5年居世界首位。根据“十四五”规划和2035年远景目标建议，中国将推动能源清洁低碳安全高效利用，加快新能源、绿色环保等产业发展，促进经济社会发展全面绿色转型。
Second, we could deepen the transition toward clean energy. China applauds Saudi Arabia's initiative on Circular Carbon Economy, and supports the shift to low-carbon energy in the post-COVID era to achieve the goal of Sustainable Energy for All. China has put in place the world's biggest clean energy system, and has led the world in the output and sales of new energy vehicles for five years running. Under the recommendations for formulating China's 14th five-year development plan and the long-range goals for 2035, China will pursue clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient use of energy and accelerate the growth of new energy and green industries to promote greener economic and social development in all respects.
第三，构筑尊重自然的生态系统。中方支持二十国集团在减少土地退化、保护珊瑚礁、应对海洋塑料垃圾等领域深化合作，打造更牢固的全球生态安全屏障。《生物多样性公约》第十五次缔约方大会将于明年5月在中国昆明举行，中方诚挚欢迎各方出席，期待大会为未来一个时期全球生物多样性保护设定目标，采取行动。让我们携起手来，共同建设清洁美丽的世界！
Third, we could protect the ecosystem with a respect for Nature. China supports deepening G20 cooperation in reducing land degradation, conserving coral reefs, and cleaning up plastic from the ocean. Through cooperation in these and many other areas, we could build a stronger defense for global ecological security. The 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity will be held in the Chinese city of Kunming in May next year. China welcomes the participation of all parties and hopes the meeting will set goals and take actions to ensure the protection of global biodiversity in the years ahead. Let us work together for a clean and beautiful world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
15. 习近平在第73届世界卫生大会视频会议开幕式上的致辞
团结合作战胜疫情
Fighting COVID-19 Through Solidarity and Cooperation
共同构建人类卫生健康共同体
Building a Global Community of Health for All
——在第73届世界卫生大会视频会议开幕式上的致辞
（2020年5月18日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At Virtual Event of Opening of the 73rd World Health Assembly
Beijing, 18 May 2020  
大会主席先生，
世界卫生组织总干事先生，
各位代表：
President of the World Health Assembly,
Director General of the World Health Organization,
Dear Delegates,
首先，我认为，在人类抗击新冠肺炎疫情的关键时刻举行这次世卫大会，具有十分重要的意义！
To begin with, I wish to say that it is of significant importance for this World Health Assembly to be held at such a critical moment as the human race battles this novel coronavirus.
人类正在经历第二次世界大战结束以来最严重的全球公共卫生突发事件。新冠肺炎疫情突如其来，现在已波及210多个国家和地区，影响70多亿人口，夺走了30余万人的宝贵生命。在此，我谨向不幸罹难者表示哀悼！向他们的家属表示慰问！
What we are facing is the most serious global public health emergency since the end of World War II. Catching the world by surprise, COVID-19 has hit over 210 countries and regions, affected more than seven billion people around the world and claimed over 300,000 precious lives. I mourn for every life lost and express condolences to the bereaved families.
人类文明史也是一部同疾病和灾难的斗争史。病毒没有国界，疫病不分种族。面对来势汹汹的新冠肺炎疫情，国际社会没有退缩，各国人民勇敢前行，守望相助、风雨同舟，展现了人间大爱，汇聚起同疫情斗争的磅礴之力。
The history of human civilization is one of fighting diseases and tiding over disasters. The virus does not respect borders. Nor is race or nationality relevant in the face of the disease. Confronted by the ravages of COVID-19, the international community has not flinched. The people of all countries have tackled the virus head on. Around the world, people have looked out for each other and pulled together as one. With love and compassion, we have forged extraordinary synergy in the fight against COVID-19.
经过艰苦卓绝努力，付出巨大代价，中国有力扭转了疫情局势，维护了人民生命安全和身体健康。中方始终本着公开、透明、负责任的态度，及时向世卫组织及相关国家通报疫情信息，第一时间发布病毒基因序列等信息，毫无保留同各方分享防控和救治经验，尽己所能为有需要的国家提供了大量支持和帮助。
In China, after making painstaking efforts and enormous sacrifice, we have turned the tide on the virus and protected the life and health of our people. All along, we have acted with openness, transparency and responsibility. We have provided information to WHO and relevant countries in a most timely fashion. We have released the genome sequence at the earliest possible time. We have shared control and treatment experience with the world without reservation. We have done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
现在，疫情还在蔓延，防控仍需努力。我愿提出以下建议。
Even as we meet, the virus is still raging, and more must be done to bring it under control. To this end, I want to make the following proposals:
第一，全力搞好疫情防控。这是当务之急。我们要坚持以民为本、生命至上，科学调配医疗力量和重要物资，在防护、隔离、检测、救治、追踪等重要领域采取有力举措，尽快遏制疫情在全球蔓延态势，尽力阻止疫情跨境传播。要加强信息分享，交流有益经验和做法，开展检测方法、临床救治、疫苗药物研发国际合作，并继续支持各国科学家们开展病毒源头和传播途径的全球科学研究。
First, we must do everything we can for COVID-19 control and treatment. This is a most urgent task. We must always put the people first, for nothing in the world is more precious than people’s lives. We need to deploy medical expertise and critical supplies to places where they are needed the most. We need to take strong steps in such key areas as prevention, quarantine, detection, treatment and tracing. We need to move as fast as we can to curb the global spread of the virus and do our best to stem cross-border transmission. We need to step up information sharing, exchange experience and best practice, and pursue international cooperation on testing methods, clinical treatment, and vaccine and medicine research and development. We also need to continue supporting global research by scientists on the source and transmission routes of the virus.
第二，发挥世卫组织领导作用。在谭德塞总干事带领下，世卫组织为领导和推进国际抗疫合作作出了重大贡献，国际社会对此高度赞赏。当前，国际抗疫正处于关键阶段，支持世卫组织就是支持国际抗疫合作、支持挽救生命。中国呼吁国际社会加大对世卫组织政治支持和资金投入，调动全球资源，打赢疫情阻击战。
Second, the World Health Organization should lead the global response. Under the leadership of Dr. Tedros, WHO has made a major contribution in leading and advancing the global response to COVID-19. Its good work is applauded by the international community. At this crucial juncture, to support WHO is to support international cooperation and the battle for saving lives as well. China calls on the international community to increase political and financial support for WHO so as to mobilize resources worldwide to defeat the virus.
第三，加大对非洲国家支持。发展中国家特别是非洲国家公共卫生体系薄弱，帮助他们筑牢防线是国际抗疫斗争重中之重。我们应该向非洲国家提供更多物资、技术、人力支持。中国已向50多个非洲国家和非盟交付了大量医疗援助物资，专门派出了5个医疗专家组。在过去70年中，中国派往非洲的医疗队为两亿多人次非洲人民提供了医疗服务。目前，常驻非洲的46支中国医疗队正在投入当地的抗疫行动。
Third, we must provide greater support for Africa. Developing countries, African countries in particular, have weaker public health systems. Helping them build capacity must be our top priority in COVID-19 response. The world needs to provide more material, technological and personnel support for African countries. China has sent a tremendous amount of medical supplies and assistance to over 50 African countries and the African Union. Five Chinese medical expert teams have also been sent to the African continent. In total, in the past seven decades, over 200 million people in Africa have received care and treatment from Chinese medical teams. At present, 46 resident Chinese medical teams are in Africa helping with COVID-19 containment efforts locally.
第四，加强全球公共卫生治理。人类终将战胜疫情，但重大公共卫生突发事件对人类来说不会是最后一次。要针对这次疫情暴露出来的短板和不足，完善公共卫生安全治理体系，提高突发公共卫生事件应急响应速度，建立全球和地区防疫物资储备中心。中国支持在全球疫情得到控制之后，全面评估全球应对疫情工作，总结经验，弥补不足。这项工作需要科学专业的态度，需要世卫组织主导，坚持客观公正原则。
Fourth, we must strengthen global governance in the area of public health. We human beings will eventually prevail over the coronavirus. Yet this may not be the last time a major health emergency comes knocking at our door. In view of the weaknesses and deficiencies exposed by COVID-19, we need to improve the governance system for public health security. We need to respond more quickly to public health emergencies and establish global and regional reserve centers of anti-epidemic supplies. China supports the idea of a comprehensive review of the global response to COVID-19 after it is brought under control to sum up experience and address deficiencies. This work should be based on science and professionalism, led by WHO and conducted in an objective and impartial manner.
第五，恢复经济社会发展。有条件的国家要在做好常态化疫情防控的前提下，遵照世卫组织专业建议，有序开展复工复产复学。要加强国际宏观经济政策协调，维护全球产业链供应链稳定畅通，尽力恢复世界经济。
Fifth, we must restore economic and social development. While working on an ongoing basis to contain the virus, countries where conditions permit may reopen businesses and schools in an orderly fashion in observance of WHO’s professional recommendations. In the meantime, international macroeconomic policy coordination should be stepped up and the global industrial and supply chains be kept stable and unclogged if we are to restore growth to the world economy.
第六，加强国际合作。人类是命运共同体，团结合作是战胜疫情最有力的武器。这是国际社会抗击艾滋病、埃博拉、禽流感、甲型H1N1流感等重大疫情取得的重要经验，是各国人民合作抗疫的人间正道。
Sixth, we must strengthen international cooperation. Mankind is a community with a shared future. Solidarity and cooperation is our most powerful weapon for defeating the virus. This is the key lesson the world has learned from fighting HIV/AIDS, Ebola, avian influenza, influenza A (H1N1) and other major epidemics. And solidarity and cooperation is a sure way through which we, the people of the world, can defeat this novel coronavirus.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
中国始终秉持构建人类命运共同体理念，既对本国人民生命安全和身体健康负责，也对全球公共卫生事业尽责。为推进全球抗疫合作，我宣布：
China stands for the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind. China takes it as its responsibility to ensure not just the life and health of its own citizens, but also global public health. For the sake of boosting international cooperation against COVID-19, I would like to announce the following:
——中国将在两年内提供20亿美元国际援助，用于支持受疫情影响的国家特别是发展中国家抗疫斗争以及经济社会恢复发展。
— China will provide US$2 billion over two years to help with COVID-19 response and with economic and social development in affected countries, especially developing countries.
——中国将同联合国合作，在华设立全球人道主义应急仓库和枢纽，努力确保抗疫物资供应链，并建立运输和清关绿色通道。
— China will work with the UN to set up a global humanitarian response depot and hub in China, ensure the operation of anti-epidemic supply chains and foster “green corridors” for fast-track transportation and customs clearance.
——中国将建立30个中非对口医院合作机制，加快建设非洲疾控中心总部，助力非洲提升疾病防控能力。
— China will establish a cooperation mechanism for its hospitals to pair up with 30 African hospitals and accelerate the building of the Africa CDC headquarters to help the continent ramp up its disease preparedness and control capacity.
——中国新冠疫苗研发完成并投入使用后，将作为全球公共产品，为实现疫苗在发展中国家的可及性和可担负性作出中国贡献。
— COVID-19 vaccine development and deployment in China, when available, will be made a global public good. This will be China’s contribution to ensuring vaccine accessibility and affordability in developing countries.
——中国将同二十国集团成员一道落实“暂缓最贫困国家债务偿付倡议”，并愿同国际社会一道，加大对疫情特别重、压力特别大的国家的支持力度，帮助其克服当前困难。
— China will work with other G20 members to implement the Debt Service Suspension Initiative for the poorest countries. China is also ready to work with the international community to bolster support for the hardest-hit countries under the greatest strain of debt service, so that they could tide over the current difficulties.
我呼吁，让我们携起手来，共同佑护各国人民生命和健康，共同佑护人类共同的地球家园，共同构建人类卫生健康共同体！
To conclude, I call on all of us to come together and work as one. Let’s make concerted efforts to protect the life and health of people in all countries. Let’s work together to safeguard planet Earth, our common home. Let’s work together to build a global community of health for all!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
2. 习近平在第十七届中国－东盟博览会和中国－东盟商务与投资峰会开幕式上的致辞
在第十七届中国－东盟博览会和中国－东盟商务与投资峰会开幕式上的致辞
（2020年11月27日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of the 17th China-ASEAN Expo and
China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit
27 November 2020
尊敬的各国领导人，
各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Leaders of Participating Countries,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
值此第十七届中国－东盟博览会、中国－东盟商务与投资峰会开幕之际，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对参加本次大会的线上线下所有嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎和诚挚的问候！
As the 17th China-ASEAN Expo (CAEXPO) and China-ASEAN Business and Investment Summit (CABIS) open today, I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and also in my own name, a hearty welcome and warm greetings to all the guests attending in person or via the Internet.
本届中国－东盟博览会以“共建‘一带一路’，共兴数字经济”为主题，就是要深化中国－东盟数字经济合作，推动共建“一带一路”高质量发展，为双方经济社会发展注入新活力。
This year’s CAEXPO, themed “Building the Belt and Road, Strengthening Digital Economy Cooperation”, aims to deepen China-ASEAN cooperation on the digital economy, promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, and inject new vitality into the economic and social development of both sides.
中国和东盟山水相连、血脉相亲，友好关系源远流长。2013年，我提出愿同东盟国家共建21世纪海上丝绸之路，携手共建更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体。
China and ASEAN countries, connected by the same mountains and rivers, share close affinity and a longstanding friendship. In 2013, I announced an initiative for China to work with ASEAN countries for a 21st Century Maritime Silk Road and for a closer China-ASEAN community with a shared future.
我们高兴地看到，7年来，双方互联互通不断加速，经济融合持续加深，经贸合作日益加快，人文交往更加密切，中国－东盟关系成为亚太区域合作中最为成功和最具活力的典范，成为推动构建人类命运共同体的生动例证。
We are glad to note that, seven years on, China and ASEAN enjoy growing connectivity, deepening economic integration, robust business ties, and closer people-to-people exchanges. The China-ASEAN relationship has grown into the most successful and vibrant model for cooperation in the Asia-Pacific and an exemplary effort in building a community with a shared future for mankind.
面对今年突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情，双方守望相助，共克时艰，就分享抗疫经验，推进抗疫物资供应，合作研发疫苗，共同维护地区产业链、供应链稳定等达成诸多重要共识。在中国抗疫关键时刻，东盟国家及时给予中方宝贵支持和无私援助。中国在国内疫情趋于稳定后，向东盟国家派出医疗专家组，提供物资和技术援助，分享抗疫经验，及时开通双方人员和物资往来“快捷通道”和“绿色通道”。
When confronted by the sudden onslaught of COVID-19 this year, China and ASEAN have helped each other and took on the challenge in solidarity. We have reached important consensus in many respects, including sharing experience on COVID-19 response, ensuring medical supplies, conducting joint research and development of vaccines, and keeping the regional industrial and supply chains stable. At a crucial stage in China’s fight against the coronavirus, ASEAN countries promptly provided invaluable support and selfless assistance to China. Once the situation began to ease on its domestic front, China sent expert teams to ASEAN countries, offered material and technical assistance, shared containment experience, and speedily opened “fast tracks” and “green lanes” to facilitate the flow of people and goods.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局，世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，各国人民的命运从未像今天这样紧密相连。同时，世界面临的不稳定不确定因素正在增加，全球经济低迷，单边主义、保护主义抬头，网络安全、重大传染性疾病、气候变化等非传统安全威胁持续蔓延，国际秩序和全球治理体系受到冲击。
Our world is undergoing momentous changes unseen in a century. It is moving toward greater multi-polarity, economic globalization and cultural diversity, and is becoming increasingly information-oriented. Never before have the destinies of people in different countries been so closely connected. At the same time, however, the world is faced with growing uncertainties and instability. The world economy is sluggish; unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise; cyber security issues, major infectious diseases, climate change, and many other non-traditional security threats continue to spread; and the international order and global governance system are being challenged.
新形势下，中方视东盟为周边外交优先方向和高质量共建“一带一路”重点地区，支持东盟共同体建设，支持东盟在东亚合作中的中心地位，支持东盟在构建开放包容的地区架构中发挥更大作用。
Under the new circumstances, China continues to regard ASEAN as a priority in its neighborhood diplomacy and a key region in high-quality Belt and Road cooperation. China supports ASEAN’s community-building, supports ASEAN centrality in East Asian cooperation, and supports ASEAN in playing a bigger role in building an open and inclusive regional architecture.
中方愿同东盟一道，在《中国－东盟战略伙伴关系2030年愿景》指导下，推进各领域合作，维护本地区繁荣发展良好势头，建设更为紧密的中国－东盟命运共同体。为此，我愿提出4点倡议。
China will work with ASEAN to advance all-round cooperation under the guidance of the Strategic Partnership Vision 2030. Such efforts will help maintain the good momentum for development and prosperity in our region and cultivate a closer China-ASEAN community with a shared future. For that to happen, let me make the following suggestions on what we need to do:
第一，提升战略互信，深入对接发展规划。中方愿同东盟一道，按照《落实中国－东盟战略伙伴关系联合宣言的行动计划（2021－2025）》，推进未来5年各领域合作；落实《中国－东盟关于“一带一路”倡议同〈东盟互联互通总体规划2025〉对接合作的联合声明》，依托陆海新通道建设，加强铁路、公路、港口、机场、电力、通信等基础设施互联互通合作，加快推进现有经济走廊和重点项目建设，积极构建中国－东盟多式联运联盟。明年是中国－东盟建立对话关系30周年，中方愿同东盟一道，设计和举办好纪念活动，打造更高水平的战略伙伴关系。
First, we need to enhance strategic mutual trust and further synergize our development plans. China will work with ASEAN to advance our wide-ranging cooperation in the coming five years in line with the Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on China-ASEAN Strategic Partnership for Peace and Prosperity (2021-2025). China will also work with ASEAN to implement the China-ASEAN Joint Statement on Synergizing the Belt and Road Initiative and the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity 2025. To be specific, more efforts will be made to build the New International Land-Sea Trade Corridor, strengthen cooperation on infrastructure connectivity including railways, highways, ports, airports, power and communications, speed up the development of existing economic corridors and key projects, and continue to develop the China-ASEAN Multimodal Transport Alliance. Next year will mark the 30th anniversary of China-ASEAN dialogue relations. China will work with ASEAN on the planning and organization of commemorative events and take our strategic partnership to a higher level.
第二，提升经贸合作，加快地区经济全面复苏。中方愿同东盟各国加强协作，以中国－东盟自由贸易区全面建成10周年为契机，进一步实施好中国－东盟自由贸易协定。中方欢迎《区域全面经济伙伴关系协定》完成签署，希望尽早生效。中方愿同东盟方携手努力，畅通贸易、促进投资，相互开放市场，推动双方产业链、供应链、价值链深度融合。在确保做好疫情防控前提下，采取措施便利人员往来和货物流通。推动澜湄合作、中国－东盟东部增长区合作走深走实。用足用好中国－东盟博览会平台功能，为中国－东盟乃至东亚地区经贸合作全面发展发挥更大作用。
Second, we need to elevate economic and trade cooperation and facilitate an early and full recovery of the regional economy. China will enhance coordination with ASEAN countries, and take the 10th anniversary of the full establishment of the China-ASEAN FTA as an opportunity to further implement our free trade agreement. China welcomes the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and looks forward to its early entry into force. China will work with ASEAN countries to sustain the smooth flow of trade, promote mutual investment, open up markets wider to each other, and foster deeply integrated industrial, supply and value chains. Provided that all necessary COVID-19 containment protocols are duly observed, steps should be taken to facilitate the movement of people and goods. We also need to further deepen and substantiate Lancang-Mekong cooperation and China-BIMP-EAGA cooperation. The CAEXPO should be used fully as a platform with a bigger role to play in promoting all-round economic and trade cooperation between China and ASEAN and in the entire East Asia.
第三，提升科技创新，深化数字经济合作。今年是中国－东盟数字经济合作年，中方愿同东盟各国携手合作，抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革机遇，发挥互补优势，聚焦合作共赢，在智慧城市、5G、人工智能、电子商务、大数据、区块链、远程医疗等领域打造更多新的合作亮点，加强数据安全保护和政策沟通协调，为双方经济社会发展培育更多新动能。中方愿同东盟一道建设中国－东盟信息港，推动数字互联互通，打造“数字丝绸之路”。
Third, we need to enhance innovation in science and technology and deepen cooperation on the digital economy. This year is designated the China-ASEAN Year of Digital Economy Cooperation. China will work with ASEAN countries to seize the opportunities presented by the new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation. We should tap into our complementarity and pursue mutually beneficial cooperation. We could create more highlights of cooperation in such areas as smart city, 5G, artificial intelligence, e-commerce, big data, blockchain and telemedicine, and strengthen the protection of data security and policy communication and coordination, as these efforts will help nurture new drivers for the social and economic development of our two sides. China will work with ASEAN on the China-ASEAN Information Harbor to advance digital connectivity and build a digital Silk Road.
第四，提升抗疫合作，强化公共卫生能力建设。中方愿同东盟开展公共卫生领域政策对话，完善合作机制，携手抗击新冠肺炎疫情，加强信息分享和疫苗生产、研发、使用合作。中方将在疫苗投入使用后积极考虑东盟国家需求，为东盟抗疫基金提供资金支持，共同建设应急医疗物资储备库，建立中国－东盟公共卫生应急联络机制。中方愿实施好“中国－东盟健康丝绸之路人才培养项目（2020－2022）”，为东盟培养1000名卫生行政人员和专业技术人员，提高地区公共卫生服务水平。中国愿同包括东盟国家在内的国际社会加强团结合作，支持世界卫生组织发挥领导作用，共同构建人类卫生健康共同体。
Fourth, we need to strengthen cooperation against COVID-19 and enhance capacity building in public health. China stands ready for policy dialogue on public health with ASEAN to improve cooperation mechanisms. It is important that we join forces in fighting the coronavirus and step up information sharing and cooperation on the production, development, and deployment of vaccines. When its COVID-19 vaccines are available for use, China will actively consider the needs of ASEAN countries. China will provide financial support to the COVID-19 ASEAN Response Fund, and work with ASEAN in developing the Regional Reserve of Medical Supplies for Public Health Emergencies and launching a Liaison Mechanism for Public Health Emergencies with ASEAN. China will act on the China-ASEAN Human Resources Training Program of Health Silk Road (2020-2022) to train for ASEAN countries 1,000 administrative and specialized personnel in the health sector, in a bid to help deliver higher quality public health services in the region. China will work with ASEAN countries and other members of the international community through greater solidarity and cooperation to support the World Health Organization in playing a leadership role and to build a global community of health for all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当前，中国统筹疫情防控和经济社会发展取得了重大战略成果，成为世界上第一个恢复经济增长的主要经济体。不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。中国将坚定不移扩大对外开放，增强国内国际经济联动效应，以自身复苏带动世界共同复苏，包括东盟在内的世界各国都将从中受益。放眼未来，中国同东盟合作空间将更为广阔。
China has secured major strategic achievements in coordinating COVID-19 response and economic and social development. It is the first major economy in the world to resume growth. The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. China will stay as committed as ever to further opening-up, and seek greater synergy through the interplay of its domestic and world economies. China will fuel a worldwide recovery with its own economic rebound, and countries around the world, ASEAN members included, will all benefit from it. Looking ahead, China-ASEAN cooperation will enjoy still greater prospects.
中国－东盟博览会、中国－东盟商务与投资峰会是推进区域经济一体化的务实平台，希望双方通过本届盛会，创造更多商机，收获更多成果，携手共创更加繁荣美好的未来。
The CAEXPO and CABIS are a results-oriented platform for us to advance regional economic integration. I hope this year’s gathering will enable China and ASEAN countries to find more business opportunities, reap more fruits, and usher in a brighter future of prosperity.
最后，我衷心祝愿会议取得圆满成功！
To conclude, I wish the CAEXPO and CABIS a full success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
135. 习近平主席在荷兰海牙核安全峰会上的讲话全文
在荷兰海牙核安全峰会上的讲话
(2014年3月24日下午，海牙)
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Nuclear Security Summit
The Hague, 24 March 2014
尊敬的吕特首相，
Prime Minister Mark Rutte,
各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
今天，我们共聚海牙，探讨加强核安全对策，意义十分重大。首先，我谨对吕特首相和荷兰政府为本次峰会所作的积极努力和周到安排，表示衷心的感谢！
Today, we are meeting here at The Hague for an important discussion on the ways for enhancing nuclear security. First of all, I wish to express heartfelt thanks to Prime Minister Rutte and the Dutch government for the active efforts and thoughtful arrangements they have made for this summit.
上个世纪，原子的发现和核能的开发利用给人类发展带来了新的动力，极大增强了我们认识世界和改造世界的能力。同时，核能发展也伴生着核安全风险和挑战。人类要更好利用核能、实现更大发展，就必须应对好各种核安全挑战，维护好核材料和核设施安全。
During the 20th century, the discovery of the atom and the subsequent development and utilization of nuclear energy gave new impetus to the progress of humanity and greatly enhanced our ability to understand and shape the world. Yet the development of nuclear energy has its associated risks and challenges. To make better use of nuclear energy and achieve greater progress, mankind must be able to respond to various nuclear security challenges and ensure the safety of nuclear materials and facilities.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
加强核安全是一个持续进程。核能事业发展不停步，加强核安全的努力就不能停止。从2010年的华盛顿，到2012年的首尔，再到今天的海牙，核安全峰会承载着凝聚各国共识、深化核安全努力的重要使命。我们要坚持理性、协调、并进的核安全观，把核安全进程纳入健康持续发展的轨道。
Enhancing nuclear security is a never-ending process. As long as we continue to tap nuclear energy, we shall not stop our efforts to enhance nuclear security. From Washington D.C. in 2010 to Seoul in 2012 and to The Hague today, the Nuclear Security Summit (NSS) has the great responsibility of building international consensus and deepening nuclear security efforts. We must follow a sensible, coordinated and balanced approach to nuclear security and put it on the track of sound and sustainable development.
第一，发展和安全并重，以确保安全为前提发展核能事业。作为保障能源安全和应对气候变化的重要途径，和平利用核能事业，如同普罗米修斯带到人间的火种，为人类发展点燃了希望之火，拓展了美好前景。同时，如果不能有效保障核能安全，不能妥善应对核材料和核设施的潜在安全风险，就会给这一美好前景蒙上阴影，甚至带来灾难。要使核能事业发展的希望之火永不熄灭，就必须牢牢坚持安全第一原则。
First, we should place equal emphasis on development and security, and develop nuclear energy on the premise of security. The peaceful use of nuclear energy is important to ensuring energy security and tackling climate change. Like Prometheus who gave fire to humanity, the peaceful use of nuclear energy has sparked a flame of hope and opened up a bright future for mankind. On the other hand, without effective safeguards for nuclear safety and without an adequate response to the potential security risks of nuclear materials and facilities, such a bright future will be overshadowed by dark clouds or even ruined by resulting disasters. Therefore, we must strictly abide by the principle of making safety the top priority if we are to keep the flame of hope for nuclear energy development burning forever.
我们要秉持为发展求安全、以安全促发展的理念，让发展和安全两个目标有机融合，使各国政府和核能企业认识到，任何以牺牲安全为代价的核能发展都难以持续，都不是真正的发展。只有采取切实举措，才能真正管控风险；只有实现安全保障，核能才能持续发展。
We must follow the approach of enhancing security for the sake of development and promoting development by upholding security, and bring the goals of development and security in alignment with each other. We must convince the national governments and nuclear power companies of all countries that developing nuclear energy at the expense of security can neither be sustainable nor bring real development. Only by adopting credible steps and safeguards, can we keep the risks under effective control and develop nuclear energy in a sustainable way.
第二，权利和义务并重，以尊重各国权益为基础推进国际核安全进程。没有规矩，不成方圆。各国要切实履行核安全国际法律文书规定的义务，全面执行联合国安理会有关决议，巩固和发展现有核安全法律框架，为国际核安全努力提供制度保障和普遍遵循的指导原则。中国呼吁更多国家积极考虑批准核材料实物保护公约及其修订案、制止核恐怖主义行为国际公约。
Second, we should place equal emphasis on rights and obligations, and push forward the international nuclear security process on the basis of respecting the rights and interests of all countries. Nothing can be accomplished without following norms and standards. All countries should earnestly fulfill their obligations under international legal instruments relating to nuclear security, fully implement the relevant UN Security Council resolutions, consolidate and strengthen the existing legal framework governing nuclear security, and provide institutional support and universally accepted guidelines for international efforts to enhance nuclear security. China hopes that more countries will consider ratifying the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and its amendment and the International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.
各国国情不同，核能事业处于不同发展阶段，面临的核安全挑战也不尽相同。一把钥匙开一把锁。在强调各国履行有关国际义务的同时，也要尊重各国根据本国国情采取最适合自己的核安全政策和举措的权利，尊重各国保护核安全敏感信息的权利，坚持公平原则，本着务实精神，积极稳妥推进国际核安全进程。
Countries differ in national condition and stage of nuclear power development, and the nuclear security challenges they face also vary from one to another. As the saying goes, you need different keys to open different locks. While stressing the importance of countries honoring their international obligations, we should respect their right to adopt nuclear security policies and measures best suited to their specific conditions as well as their right to protect sensitive nuclear security information. We should adopt a fair and pragmatic attitude and advance the international nuclear security process in an active yet prudent manner.
第三，自主和协作并重，以互利共赢为途径寻求普遍核安全。核安全首先是国家课题，首要责任应该由各国政府承担。各国政府要知责任、负责任，强化核安全意识，培育核安全文化，加强机制建设，提升技术水平。这既是对自己负责，也是对世界负责。
Third, we should place equal emphasis on independent and collaborative efforts, and seek universal nuclear security through win-win cooperation. Nuclear security is first and foremost a national goal, and the primary responsibility must be borne by national governments. They must understand and undertake their responsibilities, develop a stronger awareness of nuclear security, foster a nuclear security culture, strengthen institutions and enhance technological capacity. This is the responsible thing to do not only for their own sake but also for the good of the world.
核安全也是全球性课题。一个木桶的盛水量，是由最短的那块板决定的。一国核材料丢失，全世界都将面临威胁。实现普遍核安全，需要各国携手努力。我们要吸引更多国家加入国际核安全进程，使各国既从中受益，也为之作出贡献，争取实现核安全进程全球化。我们要加强交流、互鉴共享，有关多边机制和倡议要统筹协调、协同努力，争取做到即使不在同一起跑线上起跑，也不让一个伙伴掉队。
Nuclear security is also a global endeavor. The amount of water a bucket can hold is determined by its shortest plank. The loss of nuclear material in one country can be a threat to the whole world. A concerted, global effort is therefore required to achieve universal nuclear security. We must bring more countries into the international nuclear security process and try to turn it into a global undertaking, so that all will contribute to and benefit from it. We should strengthen exchanges to learn from each other and share experience, and improve coordination between the relevant multilateral mechanisms and initiatives. Although the starting line may be different for different countries, we should make sure that no one falls behind in this common endeavor.
第四，治标和治本并重，以消除根源为目标全面推进核安全努力。核安全涉及不同层面，既包括实施科学有效管理，发展先进安全核能技术，也包括妥善应对核恐怖主义和核扩散。完善核安全政策举措，发展现代化和低风险的核能技术，坚持核材料供需平衡，加强防扩散出口控制，深化打击核恐怖主义的国际合作，是消除核安全隐患和核扩散风险的直接和有效途径。
Fourth, we should place equal emphasis on treating symptoms and addressing causes, and advance the nuclear security endeavor in all respects with the goal of removing the associated risks at the root. The issue of nuclear security has many dimensions, from exercising sound and effective management to developing advanced and secure nuclear energy technologies and to dealing with nuclear terrorism and nuclear proliferation. To eliminate the potential risks of nuclear security and nuclear proliferation in a direct and effective way, we must improve relevant policies and measures, develop modern, low-risk nuclear energy technologies, maintain balanced supply and demand of nuclear materials, strengthen non-proliferation efforts and export control, and deepen international cooperation against nuclear terrorism.
治标还要治本。只有营造和平稳定的国际环境，发展和谐友善的国家关系，开展和睦开放的文明交流，才能从根源上解决核恐怖主义和核扩散问题，实现核能的持久安全和发展。
But more importantly, we must tackle the root causes. We need to foster a peaceful and stable international environment, encourage harmonious and friendly relations between countries, and conduct exchanges among different civilizations in an amicable and open-minded manner. This is the only way to tackle the root causes of nuclear terrorism and nuclear proliferation, and to achieve lasting security and development of nuclear power.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
中国一向把核安全工作放在和平利用核能事业的首要位置，按照最严格标准对核材料和核设施实施管理。发展核能事业50多年来，中国保持了良好的核安全记录。
China gives top priority to nuclear security in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, and manages nuclear materials and facilities according to the highest standard. China has maintained a good record of nuclear security in the past fifty years and more.
荷兰哲人伊拉斯谟说过，预防胜于治疗。近几年，国际上发生的重大核事故为各国敲响了警钟，我们必须尽一切可能防止历史悲剧重演。
According to Dutch philosopher Erasmus, prevention is better than cure. The horrific nuclear accidents of the past few years have rung the alarm bell for all of us, and we must do whatever we can to prevent a recurrence of past tragedies.
为防患于未然，中国全面采取了核安全保障举措。我们着力提高核安全技术水平，提高核安全应急能力，对全国核设施开展了全面安全检查，确保所有核材料和核设施得到有效安全保障。我们制定和实施了核安全中长期规划，完善国家核安全法规体系，正在制定国家核安全条例，扎实推进核安全工作机制化、法制化。
As a precautionary step, China has tightened nuclear security measures across the board. We have made great efforts to improve our technology and emergency response, and conducted comprehensive security checks on nuclear facilities across the country to make sure that all nuclear materials and facilities are placed under effective safeguards. We have adopted and implemented a medium- and long-term program on nuclear security and improved the legal framework, and we are in the process of drafting national regulations with a view to putting nuclear security endeavor on an institutional and legal footing.
中国积极推动核安全国际合作。中国同美国合建的核安全示范中心举行了奠基仪式，工程建设进展顺利。这个中心将为地区乃至国际核安全技术交流合作作出贡献。中国在打击核材料非法贩运领域同俄罗斯和哈萨克斯坦等国开展一系列合作项目。中国支持在经济和技术可行的情况下，尽可能减少高浓铀使用，正在国际原子能机构框架内帮助加纳把一个使用高浓铀的研究堆改造为使用低浓铀燃料。中国向国际原子能机构核安全基金捐款，通过举办培训班等方式，提升亚太地区国家核安全能力。
China has made actively promoted international cooperation on nuclear security. Groundbreaking was held for the Center of Excellence on Nuclear Security, a joint project between China and the United States, and construction of the Center is well under way. It will contribute to technical exchanges and cooperation on nuclear security in the region and beyond. China has launched a number of cooperation projects with Russia and Kazakhstan to combat illicit trafficking of nuclear materials. China supports the efforts to reduce as much as possible the use of highly enriched uranium (HEU) when economically and technologically feasible, and is helping Ghana to convert an HEU-fueled research reactor to using low enriched uranium (LEU) within the IAEA framework. China has also made contributions to the IAEA Nuclear Security Fund, and helped enhance the nuclear security capability of Asia-Pacific countries through hosting training sessions and a variety of other ways.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
光明前进一分，黑暗便后退一分。我们在核安全领域多作一份努力，恐怖主义就少一次可乘之机。为实现持久核安全，中国愿意继续作出自己的努力和贡献。
Where light inches forward, darkness retreats. The more we do to enhance nuclear security, the less chance we will leave to terrorists. To achieve lasting nuclear security, China will continue its efforts in the following areas:
第一，中国将坚定不移增强自身核安全能力，继续致力于加强核安全政府监管能力建设，加大核安全技术研发和人力资源投入力度，坚持培育和发展核安全文化。
First, China will stay firmly committed to strengthening its own nuclear security capability. We will continue to enhance the government's regulatory capacity, increase investments in relevant technological development and human resources, and foster and develop a nuclear security culture.
第二，中国将坚定不移参与构建国际核安全体系，同各国一道推动建立公平、合作、共赢的国际核安全体系，促进各国共享和平利用核能事业的成果。
Second, China will stay firmly committed to building the international nuclear security system. We will work with other countries to build an international nuclear security system featuring fairness and win-win cooperation, and encourage countries to share the fruits of peaceful use of nuclear energy.
第三，中国将坚定不移支持核安全国际合作，愿意为此分享技术和经验，贡献资源和平台，促进地区和国际核安全合作。中国支持国际原子能机构发挥主导作用，鼓励其帮助发展中国家提高核安全能力。中国将继续积极参与核安全活动，邀请国际原子能机构开展实物保护咨询服务。
Third, China will stay firmly committed to supporting international cooperation on nuclear security. We stand ready to share technology, experience, resources and platforms to promote regional and international nuclear security cooperation. China supports the IAEA's leading role and encourages it to help developing countries build up nuclear security capacity. China will continue to take an active part in nuclear security activities, and invite IAEA to conduct International Physical Protection Advisory Service.
第四，中国将坚定不移维护地区和世界和平稳定，坚持和平发展、合作共赢，通过平等对话和友好协商妥善处理矛盾和争端，同各国一道致力于消除核恐怖主义和核扩散存在的根源。
Fourth, China will stay firmly committed to upholding regional and global peace and stability. We will continue to pursue peaceful development and win-win cooperation, handle differences and disputes through equal-footed dialogue and friendly consultations, and work with all other countries to remove the root causes of nuclear terrorism and nuclear proliferation.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
加强核安全，既是我们的共同承诺，也是我们的共同责任。让我们携手合作，使各国人民对实现持久核安全更有信心、对核能事业造福人类更有信心！
To strengthen nuclear security is our shared commitment and common responsibility. Let us work together so that people in the world will have more confidence in lasting nuclear security and the benefits nuclear power brings them.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
127. 习近平在亚洲相互协作与信任措施会议第四次峰会上的讲话
积极树立亚洲安全观 共创安全合作新局面
New Asian Security Concept for New Progress in Security Cooperation
——在亚洲相互协作与信任措施会议第四次峰会上的讲话
--Remarks at the Fourth Summit of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
2014年5月21日，上海
Shanghai Expo Center, 21 May 2014
各位来宾，各位同事，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Distinguished Guests,
Colleagues,
Friends,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
感谢土耳其总统特别代表达乌特奥卢外长刚才的发言。值此中方担任亚信主席国之际，我谨对各方特别是亚信倡议国哈萨克斯坦和前任主席国土耳其给予中方的信任和支持，表示衷心的感谢！
I would like to thank Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, the Special Representative of the Turkish President, for his remarks. China has assumed the chairmanship of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA), so please allow me to take this opportunity to express heartfelt thanks to all sides, in particular Kazakhstan, the initiator of CICA, and Turkey, the previous chair of CICA, for your trust and support.
现在，我代表中华人民共和国发言。
Now, let me make some remarks on behalf of the People’s Republic of China.
今天，包括亚信成员国、观察员、峰会客人在内的47个国家和国际组织的领导人及代表相聚上海，大家围绕“加强对话、信任与协作，共建和平、稳定与合作的新亚洲”这一主题，共商安全合作大计，共谋长治久安良策，共襄发展繁荣盛举，对亚洲和世界安全都意义重大、影响深远。
The summit today has brought together leaders and representatives from 47 countries and international organizations, including CICA member states, observers and invited guests of the Shanghai summit. Under the theme “Enhancing Dialogue, Trust and Coordination for a New Asia of Peace, Stability and Cooperation”, we will discuss the important subject of security cooperation, explore policies for long-term peace and stability, and jointly promote development and prosperity. As such, this summit is of great importance to security in Asia and the world at large and will have far-reaching impacts.
今天的亚洲，拥有全世界67%的人口和三分之一的经济总量，是众多文明、民族的汇聚交融之地。亚洲和平发展同人类前途命运息息相关，亚洲稳定是世界和平之幸，亚洲振兴是世界发展之福。
Asia today is home to 67% of the world’s population and accounts for one third of the global economy. It is a place where diverse civilizations and nations meet and interact. Peace and development of Asia is closely connected with the future of mankind, and Asia’s stability and revival is a blessing to peace and development of the world.
今天的亚洲，虽然面临的风险和挑战增多，但依然是世界上最具发展活力和潜力的地区，和平、发展、合作、共赢始终是地区形势主流，通过协商谈判处理分歧争端也是地区国家主要政策取向。亚洲在世界战略全局中的地位不断上升，在世界多极化、国际关系民主化进程中发挥着越来越重要的作用。亚洲良好局面来之不易，值得倍加珍惜。
Asia today, though facing more risks and challenges, is still the most dynamic and promising region in the world. Peace, development and win-win cooperation are the main trend in the region, and countries in the region generally prefer policies that address differences and disputes through consultation and negotiation. Asia enjoys a rising status in the international strategic landscape and plays an increasingly important role in promoting a multi-polar world and democracy in international relations. Such a sound situation in the region has not come easily and ought to be doubly cherished.
今天的亚洲，区域经济合作方兴未艾，安全合作正在迎难而上，各种合作机制更加活跃，地区安全合作进程正处在承前启后的关键阶段。
Asia today is witnessing vibrant cooperation in the economic field. Cooperation in the security field is making progress despite difficulties, and various cooperation mechanisms are more dynamic. Asia has come to a crucial stage in security cooperation where we need to build on the past achievements and strive for new progress.
“明者因时而变，知者随事而制。”形势在发展，时代在进步。要跟上时代前进步伐，就不能身体已进入21世纪，而脑袋还停留在冷战思维、零和博弈的旧时代。我们认为，应该积极倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的亚洲安全观，创新安全理念，搭建地区安全和合作新架构，努力走出一条共建、共享、共赢的亚洲安全之路。
As a Chinese saying goes, “A wise man changes as time and circumstances change.” We need to keep pace with the changing circumstances and evolving times. One cannot live in the 21st century with the outdated thinking from the age of Cold War and zero-sum game. We believe that it is necessary to advocate common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security in Asia. We need to innovate our security concept, establish a new regional security cooperation architecture, and jointly build a road for security of Asia that is shared by and win-win to all.
共同，就是要尊重和保障每一个国家安全。亚洲多样性特点突出，各国大小、贫富、强弱很不相同，历史文化传统和社会制度千差万别，安全利益和诉求也多种多样。大家共同生活在亚洲这个大家园里，利益交融、安危与共，日益成为一荣俱荣、一损俱损的命运共同体。
Common security means respecting and ensuring the security of each and every country. Asia is a region of great diversity. Countries differ in size, wealth and strength. They vary in historical and cultural traditions as well as social systems, and have different security interests and aspirations. However, we all live in the same Asian family. With our interests and security so closely intertwined, we will swim or sink together and we are increasingly becoming a community of common destiny.
安全应该是普遍的。不能一个国家安全而其他国家不安全，一部分国家安全而另一部分国家不安全，更不能牺牲别国安全谋求自身所谓绝对安全。否则，就会像哈萨克斯坦谚语说的那样：“吹灭别人的灯，会烧掉自己的胡子。”
Security must be universal. We cannot just have the security of one or some countries while leaving the rest insecure, still less should one seek the so-called absolute security of itself at the expense of the security of others. Otherwise, just as a Kazakh proverb aptly puts it, “One who tries to blow out other’s oil lamp will get his beard on fire.”
安全应该是平等的。各国都有平等参与地区安全事务的权利，也都有维护地区安全的责任。任何国家都不应该谋求垄断地区安全事务，侵害其他国家正当权益。
Security must be equal. Every country has the equal right to participate in the security affairs of the region as well as the responsibility of upholding regional security. No country should attempt to dominate regional security affairs or infringe upon the legitimate rights and interests of other countries.
安全应该是包容的。应该把亚洲多样性和各国的差异性转化为促进地区安全合作的活力和动力，恪守尊重主权、独立和领土完整、互不干涉内政等国际关系基本准则，尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，尊重并照顾各方合理安全关切。强化针对第三方的军事同盟不利于维护地区共同安全。
Security must be inclusive. We should turn Asia’s diversity and the differences among Asian countries into the energy and driving force for regional security cooperation. We should abide by the basic norms governing international relations such as respecting sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and non-interference in internal affairs, respect the social systems and development paths chosen by countries on their own, and fully respect and accommodate the legitimate security concerns of all parties. To beef up and entrench a military alliance targeted at a third party is not conducive to maintaining common security.
综合，就是要统筹维护传统领域和非传统领域安全。亚洲安全问题极为复杂，既有热点敏感问题，又有民族宗教矛盾，恐怖主义、跨国犯罪、环境安全、网络安全、能源资源安全、重大自然灾害等带来的挑战明显上升，传统安全威胁和非传统安全威胁相互交织，安全问题的内涵和外延都在进一步拓展。
Comprehensive security means upholding security in both traditional and non-traditional fields. Asia’s security challenges are extremely complicated, which include both hotspot and sensitive issues and ethnic and religious problems. The challenges brought by terrorism, transnational crimes, environmental security, cyber security, energy and resource security and major natural disasters are clearly on the rise. Traditional and non-traditional security threats are interwoven. Security is a growing issue in both scope and implication.
我们应该通盘考虑亚洲安全问题的历史经纬和现实状况，多管齐下、综合施策，协调推进地区安全治理。既要着力解决当前突出的地区安全问题，又要统筹谋划如何应对各类潜在的安全威胁，避免头痛医头、脚痛医脚。
We should take into full account the historical background and reality of Asia’s security issues, adopt a multi-pronged and holistic approach, and enhance regional security governance in a coordinated way. While tackling the immediate security challenges facing the region, we should also make plans for addressing potential security threats, and avoid a fragmented and palliative approach that only treats the symptoms.
对恐怖主义、分裂主义、极端主义这“三股势力”，必须采取零容忍态度，加强国际和地区合作，加大打击力度，使本地区人民都能够在安宁祥和的土地上幸福生活。
We should have zero tolerance for terrorism, separatism and extremism, strengthen international and regional cooperation, and step up the fight against the three forces, in order to bring a life of happiness and tranquility to the people of this region.
合作，就是要通过对话合作，促进各国和本地区安全。有句谚语说得好：“力量不在胳膊上，而在团结上。”要通过坦诚深入的对话沟通，增进战略互信，减少相互猜疑，求同化异、和睦相处。要着眼各国共同安全利益，从低敏感领域入手，积极培育合作应对安全挑战的意识，不断扩大合作领域、创新合作方式，以合作谋和平、以合作促安全。要坚持以和平方式解决争端，反对动辄使用武力或以武力相威胁，反对为一己之私挑起事端、激化矛盾，反对以邻为壑、损人利己。
Cooperative security means promoting the security of both individual countries and the region as a whole through dialogue and cooperation. As the proverb goes, “Strength does not come from the muscle of the arms, but from the unison of the heart.” We should engage in sincere and in-depth dialogue and communication to increase strategic mutual trust, reduce mutual misgivings, seek common ground while resolving differences and live in harmony with each other. We should bear in mind the common security interests of all countries, and start with low-sensitivity areas to build the awareness of meeting security challenges through cooperation. We should expand the scope and means of cooperation and promote peace and security through cooperation. We should stay committed to resolving disputes through peaceful means, stand against the arbitrary use or threat of force, oppose the provocation and escalation of tensions for selfish interests, and reject the practice of shifting trouble to neighbors and seeking selfish gains at the expense of others.
亚洲的事情归根结底要靠亚洲人民来办，亚洲的问题归根结底要靠亚洲人民来处理，亚洲的安全归根结底要靠亚洲人民来维护。亚洲人民有能力、有智慧通过加强合作来实现亚洲和平稳定。
In the final analysis, it is for the people of Asia to run the affairs of Asia, solve the problems of Asia and uphold the security of Asia. The people of Asia have the capability and wisdom to achieve peace and stability in the region through enhanced cooperation.
亚洲是开放的亚洲。亚洲国家在加强自身合作的同时，要坚定致力于同其他地区国家、其他地区和国际组织的合作，欢迎各方为亚洲安全和合作发挥积极和建设性作用，努力实现双赢、多赢、共赢。
Asia is open to the world. While enhancing their own cooperation with each other, countries in Asia must also firmly commit themselves to cooperation with countries in other parts of the world, other regions and international organizations. We welcome all parties to play a positive and constructive role in promoting Asia’s security and cooperation and work together to achieve win-win outcomes for all.
可持续，就是要发展和安全并重以实现持久安全。“求木之长者,必固其根本；欲流之远者,必浚其泉源。”发展是安全的基础，安全是发展的条件。贫瘠的土地上长不成和平的大树，连天的烽火中结不出发展的硕果。对亚洲大多数国家来说，发展就是最大安全，也是解决地区安全问题的“总钥匙”。
Sustainable security means that we need to focus on both development and security so that security would be durable. As a Chinese saying goes, for a tree to grow tall, a strong and solid root is required; for a river to reach far, an unimpeded source is necessary. Development is the foundation of security, and security the precondition for development. The tree of peace does not grow on barren land while the fruit of development is not produced amidst flames of war. For most Asian countries, development means the greatest security and the master key to regional security issues.
要建造经得起风雨考验的亚洲安全大厦，就应该聚焦发展主题，积极改善民生，缩小贫富差距，不断夯实安全的根基。要推动共同发展和区域一体化进程，努力形成区域经济合作和安全合作良性互动、齐头并进的大好局面，以可持续发展促进可持续安全。
To build an Asian security mansion that could stand the test of wind storms, we need to focus on development, actively improve people’s lives and narrow down the wealth gap so as to cement the foundation of security. We need to advance the process of common development and regional integration, foster sound interactions and synchronized progress of regional economic cooperation and security cooperation, and promote sustainable security through sustainable development.
125. 习近平在和平共处五项原则发表60周年纪念大会上的讲话
弘扬和平共处五项原则 建设合作共赢美好世界
Carry forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence to build a better world through win-win cooperation
——在和平共处五项原则发表60周年纪念大会上的讲话
（2014年6月28日）
中华人民共和国主席
习近平	
Address by H.E. Mr. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Meeting Marking the 60th Anniversary Of the Initiation of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence
28 June 2014
尊敬的吴登盛总统，尊敬的安萨里副总统，尊敬的各位使节、各位嘉宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency President U Thein Sein, Your Excellency Vice President Mohammad Hamid Ansari, Diplomatic Envoys, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，我们在这里隆重集会，纪念和平共处五项原则发表60周年。这是中国、印度、缅甸和国际社会共同的盛会，对弘扬和平共处五项原则、增进各国人民友好合作、促进世界和平与发展，具有重要意义。	
Today, we are meeting here to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the initiation of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. This is an important occasion not only for China, India and Myanmar, but also for the international community. It is of great significance for carrying forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, enhancing friendship and cooperation among peoples of various countries, and promoting world peace and development.
在这里，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾和朋友的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！	
On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I extend a very warm welcome to all of you, distinguished guests and friends.
刚才，吴登盛总统、安萨里副总统发表了热情洋溢的重要讲话，我对他们的讲话表示高度评价。	
President U Thein Sein and Vice President Hamid Ansari have just delivered warm and important remarks, which I very much appreciate.
60年前，在第二次世界大战结束后兴起的非殖民化运动中，亚非拉民族独立解放事业蓬勃发展，新生的国家渴望建立平等的国际关系。中国、印度、缅甸顺应这一历史潮流，共同倡导了互相尊重主权和领土完整、互不侵犯、互不干涉内政、平等互利、和平共处五项原则。	
Six decades ago, in the course of decolonization that started at the end of the Second World War, the struggle for independence and liberation in Asia, Africa and Latin America surged. The newly independent countries longed for equality in international relations. Echoing this historical trend, China, India and Myanmar jointly initiated the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, namely, mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-aggression, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit, and peaceful coexistence.
1954年6月28日和29日，中印、中缅分别发表联合声明，确认这五项原则将在相互关系以及各自国家同亚洲及世界其他国家的关系中予以适用。这是国际关系史上的重大创举，为推动建立公正合理的新型国际关系作出了历史性贡献。	
On 28 and 29 June 1954, China issued two joint statements respectively with India and Myanmar, confirming their commitment to these Five Principles in conducting their mutual relations and their respective relations with other countries in Asia and the world. This was a major initiative in the history of international relations and a historic contribution to the building of a new type of just and equitable international relations.
抚今追昔，我们对共同倡导和平共处五项原则的三国老一辈领导人表示深切的缅怀，对长期以来坚持弘扬和平共处五项原则的各国有识之士，致以崇高的敬意！	
At this moment of reflection, we greatly cherish the memory of the past leaders of our three countries who initiated the Five Principles and pay high tribute to people with vision in all countries who have carried forward the Five Principles over the years.
今天，我们共同纪念和平共处五项原则发表60周年，就是要探讨新形势下如何更好弘扬这五项原则，推动建立新型国际关系，共同建设合作共赢的美好世界。	
The commemoration of the 60th anniversary of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence today gives us an opportunity to explore ways to better promote these Five Principles in the new era so as to build a new type of international relations and a better world of win-win cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
和平共处五项原则之所以在亚洲诞生，是因为它传承了亚洲人民崇尚和平的思想传统。中华民族历来崇尚“和为贵”、“和而不同”、“协和万邦”、“兼爱非攻”等理念。印度、缅甸等亚洲国家人民也历来崇尚仁爱、慈善、和平等价值观。印度伟大诗人泰戈尔用诗歌的语言写道：“你以为用战争可以获取友谊？春天就会从眼前姗姗而去。”缅甸人民建立了和平塔，用来祈祷世界和平。	
It is no coincidence that the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence were born in Asia, because they embody the Asian tradition of loving peace. The Chinese nation has always held such beliefs as "peace is most precious", "harmony without uniformity", "peace among all nations" and "universal love and non-aggression". The people of India, Myanmar and other Asian countries also cherish the values of love, kindness and peace. In one of his poems, Rabindranath Tagore, the great Indian poet, wrote that if you think friendship can be won through war, spring will fade away before your eyes. Myanmar has a World Peace Pagoda where people go to pray for world peace.
和平共处五项原则生动反映了联合国宪章宗旨和原则，并赋予这些宗旨和原则以可见、可行、可依循的内涵。和平共处五项原则中包含4个“互”字、1个“共”字，既代表了亚洲国家对国际关系的新期待，也体现了各国权利、义务、责任相统一的国际法治精神。
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence give concrete expression to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and facilitate their implementation. The key elements of the Five Principles, namely, "mutual" and "coexistence", demonstrate the new expectations the Asian countries have for international relations and the principle of international rule of law that give countries rights, obligations and responsibilities.
上个世纪50年代，在和平共处五项原则指导下，中印友好之风吹遍了两国广袤大地。当年，周恩来总理访问印度时，到处可以听到“潘查希拉金达巴”（五项原则万岁）、“印地秦尼巴伊巴伊”（印中人民是兄弟）的欢呼声。中缅在和平共处五项原则指导下妥善解决了边界问题，1960年两国签署边界条约，这是新中国同周边邻国签订的第一个边界条约。中缅两国还签署了中缅友好和互不侵犯条约，这是亚洲国家间首个和平友好条约。	
In the 1950s, guided by the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, the wind of friendship swept across the vast land of China and India. When Premier Zhou Enlai visited India, everywhere he went, the local people greeted him with "Panchsheel Zindabad", which means long live the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, and "Hindi-Chini Bhai Bhai", which means Indians and Chinese are brothers. Under the guidance of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, China and Myanmar settled the boundary issue. The China-Myanmar boundary treaty signed in 1960 is the first boundary treaty the People's Republic of China signed with its neighbors. The Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Non-Aggression between China and Myanmar is also the first treaty of peace and friendship between Asian countries.
60年来，和平共处五项原则不仅在中国、印度、缅甸生根发芽、深入人心，而且走向亚洲、走向世界，中国、印度、缅甸都为此作出了重要贡献。中方认为，总结国际关系实践，和平共处五项原则是具有强大生命力的。印方认为，如果和平共处五项原则在所有国家相互关系中获得认可，那么世界就几乎不会有任何冲突和战争。缅方表示，和平共处五项原则对一切国家都是适当的指导原则。	
For 60 years, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have struck deep roots and flourished in China, India and Myanmar. Meanwhile, thanks to the important contribution made by the three countries, these principles are accepted in other parts of Asia and the world. China believes that the successful application of the Five Principles in international relations fully testifies to their strong vitality. India has said that, if these principles are recognized in mutual relations of all countries, then indeed there would hardly be any conflict and certainly no war. Myanmar also believes that the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence are appropriate guiding principles for all countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
60年来，历经国际风云变幻的考验，和平共处五项原则作为一个开放包容的国际法原则，集中体现了主权、正义、民主、法治的价值观。	
Having been tested by the evolution of international relations in the past six decades, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, as open and inclusive principles of international law, embody the values of sovereignty, justice, democracy and rule of law.
——和平共处五项原则已经成为国际关系基本准则和国际法基本原则。和平共处五项原则精辟体现了新型国际关系的本质特征，是一个相互联系、相辅相成、不可分割的统一体，适用于各种社会制度、发展水平、体量规模国家之间的关系。1955年，万隆会议通过的十项原则是对和平共处五项原则的引申和发展。上个世纪60年代兴起的不结盟运动把五项原则作为指导原则。1970年和1974年联合国大会通过的有关宣言都接受了和平共处五项原则。和平共处五项原则为当今世界一系列国际组织和国际文件所采纳，得到国际社会广泛赞同和遵守。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have become the basic norms governing international relations as well as basic principles of international law. These Five Principles, as an integrated, interconnected and indivisible concept, capture the essence of today's international relations, and can apply to relations among all countries regardless of their social system, stage of development or size. The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence were expanded into ten principles adopted at the Bandung Conference in 1955. The Non-Aligned Movement which emerged in the 1960s adopted the Five Principles as its guiding principles. These principles were also incorporated in the relevant declarations adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1970 and 1974. Today, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence are also endorsed by a host of international organizations and international instruments, and are widely supported and observed by the international community.
——和平共处五项原则有力维护了广大发展中国家权益。和平共处五项原则的精髓，就是所有国家主权一律平等，反对任何国家垄断国际事务。这为广大发展中国家捍卫国家主权和独立提供了强大思想武器，成为发展中国家团结合作、联合自强的旗帜，加深了广大发展中国家相互理解和信任，促进了南南合作，也推动了南北关系改善和发展。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have effectively upheld the rights and interests of the developing world. The core of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence is that there is sovereign equality among all countries and that no country should monopolize international affairs. These principles offer a powerful intellectual tool for developing countries to uphold their sovereignty and independence, and they have thus become a rallying call for enhancing solidarity, cooperation and strength among them. These principles have deepened the mutual understanding and trust among developing countries, boosted South-South cooperation and also contributed to the improvement of North-South relations.
——和平共处五项原则为推动建立更加公正合理的国际政治经济秩序发挥了积极作用。和平共处五项原则摒弃了弱肉强食的丛林法则，壮大了反帝反殖力量，加速了殖民体系崩溃瓦解。在东西方冷战对峙的大背景下，所谓“大家庭”、“集团政治”、“势力范围”等方式都没有处理好国与国关系，反而带来了矛盾、激化了局势。与之形成鲜明对照的是，和平共处五项原则为和平解决国家间历史遗留问题及国际争端开辟了崭新道路。	
The Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence have played a positive role in building a more equitable and rational international political and economic order. Rejecting the law of the jungle by which the strong bullies the weak, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence strengthened the movement against imperialism and colonialism that eventually brought colonialism to an end. During the Cold War of East-West confrontation, none of the policies such as "the big family", "bloc politics" or "sphere of influence" was successful in handling state-to-state relations, and they only heightened antagonism and tension. By contrast, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence provided a new approach for peacefully resolving historical issues and international disputes.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
当今世界正在发生深刻复杂的变化，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流更加强劲，国际社会日益成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。同时，国际关系中的不公正不平等现象仍很突出，全球性挑战层出不穷，各种地区冲突和局部战争此起彼伏，不少国家的民众特别是儿童依然生活在战火硝烟之中，不少发展中国家人民依然承受着饥寒的煎熬。维护世界和平、促进共同发展，依然任重道远。	
Today's world is going through profound and intricate changes. Peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit have become an unstoppable trend. Countries are bound together in this community of common destiny. On the other hand, injustice and inequality are still pronounced problems in international relations. Global challenges keep emerging, so do conflicts and local wars in various regions. People in many countries, children in particular, are ravaged by war. Many people in developing countries still suffer from hunger. To uphold global peace and promote common development remains a daunting challenge facing mankind.
新形势下，和平共处五项原则的精神不是过时了，而是历久弥新；和平共处五项原则的意义不是淡化了，而是历久弥深；和平共处五项原则的作用不是削弱了，而是历久弥坚。	
In the new era today, the spirit of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, instead of being outdated, remains as relevant as ever; its significance, rather than diminishing, remains as important as ever; and its role, rather than being weakened, has continued to grow.
“凡益之道，与时偕行。”刚才，吴登盛总统、安萨里副总统都对新形势下坚持和弘扬和平共处五项原则、推动建设新型国际关系和美好世界谈了很好的想法和主张。在这个问题上，中国、印度、缅甸有着广泛共识。我愿谈几点看法。	
As an ancient Chinese teaching goes, all good principles should adapt to changing times to remain relevant. Just now, both President U Thein Sein and Vice President Hamid Ansari have elaborated on how to carry forward the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence to build a new type of international relations and a better world in the new era. Indeed, China, India and Myanmar have a lot in common in this regard. Here, I wish to state the following:
第一，坚持主权平等。主权是国家独立的根本标志，也是国家利益的根本体现和可靠保证。主权和领土完整不容侵犯，各国应该尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切。这些都是硬道理，任何时候都不能丢弃，任何时候都不应动摇。	
First, we should uphold sovereign equality. Sovereignty is the most important feature of any independent state as well as the embodiment and safeguard of its national interests. No infringement upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a country is allowed. Countries should respect each other's core interests and key concerns. These are fundamental rules which should not be cast aside or undermined at any time.
国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会平等成员，都有平等参与国际事务的权利。各国的事务应该由各国人民自己来管。我们要尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，反对出于一己之利或一己之见，采用非法手段颠覆别国合法政权。	
All countries, regardless of their size, strength or level of development, are equal members of the international community, and they are entitled to equal participation in international affairs. The internal affairs of a country should be managed by its own people. We should respect the right of a country to choose its own social system and model of development, and oppose the attempt to oust the legitimate government of a country through illegal means to seek self interests or to impose one's own views.
第二，坚持共同安全。安全应该是普遍的。各国都有平等参与国际和地区安全事务的权利，也都有维护国际和地区安全的责任。我们要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续安全的理念，尊重和保障每一个国家的安全。不能一个国家安全而其他国家不安全，一部分国家安全而另一部分国家不安全，更不能牺牲别国安全谋求自身所谓绝对安全。我们要加强国际和地区合作，共同应对日益增多的非传统安全威胁，坚决打击一切形式的恐怖主义，铲除恐怖主义滋生的土壤。	
Second, we should uphold common security. Security should be universal. All countries have the right to participate in international and regional security affairs on an equal footing and shoulder the shared responsibility to maintain security both internationally and in various regions. We should champion common, comprehensive, cooperative, and sustainable security, and respect and ensure every country's security. It is unacceptable to have security just for one country or some countries while leaving the rest insecure, and still less should one be allowed to seek the so-called "absolute security" of itself at the expense of others' security. We need to step up cooperation at the global and regional level and jointly counter non-traditional security threats which are on the increase, fight against terrorism of all forms and remove the breeding ground of terrorism.
对待国家间存在的分歧和争端，要坚持通过对话协商以和平方式解决，以对话增互信，以对话解纷争，以对话促安全，不能动辄诉诸武力或以武力相威胁。热衷于使用武力，不是强大的表现，而是道义贫乏、理念苍白的表现。只有基于道义、理念的安全，才是基础牢固、真正持久的安全。我们要推动建设开放、透明、平等的亚太安全合作新架构，推动各国共同维护地区和世界和平安全。	
Disputes and differences between countries should be resolved through dialogue, consultation and peaceful means. We should increase mutual trust, and settle disputes and promote security through dialogue. Willful threat or use of force should be rejected. Flexing military muscles only reveals the lack of moral ground or vision rather than reflecting one's strength. Security can be solid and enduring only if it is based on moral high ground and vision. We should work for a new architecture of Asia-Pacific security cooperation that is open, transparent and equality-based, and bring all countries together in a common endeavor to maintain peace and security in both our region and the world.
第三，坚持共同发展。天空足够大，地球足够大，世界也足够大，容得下各国共同发展繁荣。一些国家越来越富裕，另一些国家长期贫穷落后，这样的局面是不可持续的。水涨船高，小河有水大河满，大家发展才能发展大家。各国在谋求自身发展时，应该积极促进其他国家共同发展，让发展成果更多更好惠及各国人民。	
Third, we should advance common development. The sky, earth and world are big enough to allow the common development and prosperity of all countries. Today, some countries are getting richer while others are locked in poverty and underdevelopment. Such a situation should not be allowed to continue. Just as rising water lifts all boats and more water in the tributaries make a wider river, all will benefit when everyone develops. When developing themselves, countries should work actively for common development of others so that the gains of development will reach more people in the world.
我们要共同维护和发展开放型世界经济，共同促进世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，坚持开放的区域合作，反对各种形式的保护主义，反对任何以邻为壑、转嫁危机的意图和做法。	
We should jointly uphold and develop an open global economy, promote strong, sustainable and balanced global growth as well as trade and investment liberalization and facilitation and uphold open regional cooperation. We should oppose protectionism of all forms and any attempt or practice to hurt others' interests or shift crisis to others.
我们要推动南南合作和南北对话，增强发展中国家自主发展能力，推动发达国家承担更多责任，努力缩小南北差距，建立更加平等均衡的新型全球发展伙伴关系，夯实世界经济长期稳定发展基础。	
We should enhance South-South cooperation and North-South dialogue, strengthen developing countries' capacity for self-development, urge developed countries to shoulder more responsibilities, and narrow the North-South gap. This will help build a more equal and more balanced new global partnership for development and cement the foundation for achieving long-term and stable global growth.
第四，坚持合作共赢。“合则强，孤则弱。”合作共赢应该成为各国处理国际事务的基本政策取向。合作共赢是普遍适用的原则，不仅适用于经济领域，而且适用于政治、安全、文化等其他领域。	
Fourth, we should promote win-win cooperation. "Cooperation generates strength while isolation only leads to weakness." Win-win cooperation should be the basic policy goal of all countries in handling international affairs. It is a universal principle that applies to not only the economic field, but political, security, cultural and other areas as well.
我们应该把本国利益同各国共同利益结合起来，努力扩大各方共同利益的汇合点，不能这边搭台、那边拆台，要相互补台、好戏连台。要积极树立双赢、多赢、共赢的新理念，摒弃你输我赢、赢者通吃的旧思维，“各美其美，美人之美，美美与共，天下大同”。	
Countries should align their own interests with those of other countries and expand areas of converging interests. Instead of undercutting each other's efforts, countries should reinforce each other's endeavor and make greater common progress. We should champion a new vision of win-win outcomes for all and reject the obsolete notion of zero-sum game or winner taking all. Countries should respect others' interests while pursuing their own and advance common interests of all.
我们要坚持同舟共济、权责共担，携手应对气候变化、能源资源安全、网络安全、重大自然灾害等日益增多的全球性问题，共同呵护人类赖以生存的地球家园。	
We should help each other out in times of difficulty and assume both rights and responsibilities. We should work together to address growing global issues such as climate change, energy and resources security, cyber security and major natural disasters, in a common endeavor to protect our planet which is so crucial to our survival.
第五，坚持包容互鉴。文明多样性是人类社会的基本特征。当今世界有70亿人口，200多个国家和地区，2500多个民族，5000多种语言。不同民族、不同文明多姿多彩、各有千秋，没有优劣之分，只有特色之别。	
Fifth, we should champion inclusiveness and mutual learning. Diversity of civilizations is a defining feature of the human society. In today's world, there are 7 billion people of more than 2,500 ethnic groups who live in over 200 countries and regions and speak more than 5,000 languages. Different nations and civilizations are rich in diversity and have their own distinct features. No one is superior or inferior to others.
“万物并育而不相害，道并行而不相悖。”我们要尊重文明多样性，推动不同文明交流对话、和平共处、和谐共生，不能唯我独尊、贬低其他文明和民族。人类历史告诉我们，企图建立单一文明的一统天下，只是一种不切实际的幻想。	
"All living things are nourished without injuring one another, and all roads run parallel without interfering with one another." We should respect diversity of civilizations and promote exchanges, dialogue, peaceful and harmonious coexistence among different civilizations and should not seek supremacy or denigrate other civilizations and nations. Human history tells us that any attempt to establish a dominant civilization in the world is an illusion.
尺有所短，寸有所长。我们要倡导交流互鉴，注重汲取不同国家、不同民族创造的优秀文明成果，取长补短，兼收并蓄，共同绘就人类文明美好画卷。	
Everything has its strengths and weaknesses. We should promote mutual learning and draw on all that is good created by different countries, nations and civilizations in a joint effort to create a splendid human civilization.
第六，坚持公平正义。“大道之行也，天下为公。”公平正义是世界各国人民在国际关系领域追求的崇高目标。在当今国际关系中，公平正义还远远没有实现。	
Sixth, we should uphold fairness and justice. According to the ancient Chinese philosophy, "A just cause should be pursued for the common good". Justice is the noble goal that people of all countries pursue in international relations. However, we are still far away from realizing this goal.
我们应该共同推动国际关系民主化。世界的命运必须由各国人民共同掌握，世界上的事情应该由各国政府和人民共同商量来办。垄断国际事务的想法是落后于时代的，垄断国际事务的行动也肯定是不能成功的。	
We should jointly promote greater democracy in international relations. The destiny of the world must be determined by people of all countries, and world affairs should be managed through consultation by governments and peoples of all countries. The notion of dominating international affairs belongs to a different age, and such an attempt is doomed to failure.
我们应该共同推动国际关系法治化。推动各方在国际关系中遵守国际法和公认的国际关系基本原则，用统一适用的规则来明是非、促和平、谋发展。“法者，天下之准绳也。”在国际社会中，法律应该是共同的准绳，没有只适用他人、不适用自己的法律，也没有只适用自己、不适用他人的法律。适用法律不能有双重标准。我们应该共同维护国际法和国际秩序的权威性和严肃性，各国都应该依法行使权利，反对歪曲国际法，反对以“法治”之名行侵害他国正当权益、破坏和平稳定之实。	
We should jointly promote the rule of law in international relations. We should urge all parties to abide by international law and well-recognized basic principles governing international relations and use widely applicable rules to tell right from wrong and pursue peace and development. The ancient Chinese believed that "law is the yardstick for measuring all things under the heaven". In the international society, there should be just one law that applies to all. There is no such law that applies to others but not oneself, or vice versa. There should not be double standards when applying the law. We should jointly uphold the authority and sanctity of international law and the international order. All countries should exercise their rights in accordance with the law, oppose bending international law, and reject any attempt to undermine, in the name of "rule of law", other countries' legitimate rights and interests as well as peace and stability.
我们应该共同推动国际关系合理化。适应国际力量对比新变化推进全球治理体系改革，体现各方关切和诉求，更好维护广大发展中国家正当权益。	
We should jointly promote more balanced international relations, advance reform in global governance in keeping with new changes in the relative strengths of international forces, respond to concerns and aspirations of various parties, and better uphold the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国是和平共处五项原则的积极倡导者和坚定实践者。和平共处五项原则载入了中国宪法，是中国外交政策的基石。中国是当代国际体系的参与者、建设者、贡献者。	
China champions and firmly observes the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Enshrined in China's Constitution, the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence constitute the cornerstone of China's foreign policy. China is actively involved in building the current international system.
——中国将坚定不移走和平发展道路。走和平发展道路是中国根据时代发展潮流和自身根本利益作出的战略抉择。中国人民崇尚“己所不欲，勿施于人”。中国不认同“国强必霸论”，中国人的血脉中没有称王称霸、穷兵黩武的基因。中国将坚定不移沿着和平发展道路走下去，这对中国有利，对亚洲有利，对世界也有利，任何力量都不能动摇中国和平发展的信念。中国坚定维护自身的主权、安全、发展利益，也支持其他国家特别是广大发展中国家维护自身的主权、安全、发展利益。中国坚持不干涉别国内政原则，不会把自己的意志强加于人，即使再强大也永远不称霸。中国真诚希望其他国家都走和平发展道路，大家携手把这条路走稳走好。	
- China will firmly pursue peaceful development. This is a strategic choice China has made in keeping with the trend of the times and based on its fundamental interests. We Chinese believe that "no one should do to others what he does not want others to do to himself". China does not subscribe to the notion that a country is bound to seek hegemony when it grows in strength. Hegemony or militarism is simply not in the genes of the Chinese. China will unswervingly pursue peaceful development, because it is good for China, good for Asia and good for the world. Nothing can ever weaken China's commitment to peaceful development. China firmly upholds its sovereignty, security and development interests and supports other countries, developing countries in particular, in doing the same. China neither interferes in other countries' internal affairs nor imposes its will on others. It will never seek hegemony no matter how strong it may become. China truly hopes that all other countries will also pursue peaceful development, and that together, we can make steady progress in this common endeavor.
——中国将坚定不移在和平共处五项原则基础上发展同世界各国的友好合作。“凡交，近则必相靡以信，远则必忠之以言。”中国坚持按照亲、诚、惠、容的理念，深化同周边国家的互利合作，努力使自身发展更好惠及周边国家。中国坚持把发展中国家作为对外政策的基础，坚持正确义利观，永远做发展中国家的可靠朋友和真诚伙伴。中国重视各大国的地位和作用，致力于同各大国发展全方位合作关系，积极同美国发展新型大国关系，同俄罗斯发展全面战略协作伙伴关系，同欧洲发展和平、增长、改革、文明伙伴关系，大家一起来维护世界和平、促进共同发展。	
- China will firmly pursue friendship and cooperation with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. Our ancestors believed that "mutual trust brings neighboring countries together and goodwill brings distant countries together". China is guided by the principle of boosting amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness in deepening mutually beneficial cooperation with its neighbors and strives to deliver greater gains to its neighbors through its own development. Relations with other developing countries underpin China's foreign policy and China pursues a balanced approach to upholding principles and pursuing interests. China will remain a reliable friend and sincere partner of other developing countries. China places high importance on the standing and role of other major countries and is committed to growing relations of all-round cooperation with them. We are actively working towards building a new model of major-country relationship with the United States, forging a comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination with Russia and building partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization with Europe. In short, we are ready to work with all others to uphold world peace and boost common development.
——中国将坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略。中国正在推动落实丝绸之路经济带、21世纪海上丝绸之路、孟中印缅经济走廊、中国－东盟命运共同体等重大合作倡议，中国将以此为契机全面推进新一轮对外开放，发展开放型经济体系，为亚洲和世界发展带来新的机遇和空间。	
- China will firmly pursue a win-win strategy of opening-up. China has proposed several important cooperation initiatives, namely the Silk Road economic belt, the 21st century maritime silk road, the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar economic corridor and the China-ASEAN community of common destiny. China will seize the opportunity presented by these initiatives to launch a new round of all-round opening-up, build an open economic system and create new opportunities and space for the development of Asia and the world.
当前，中国人民正在为全面建成小康社会、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。中国梦同世界各国人民的美好梦想息息相通，中国人民愿意同各国人民在实现各自梦想的过程中相互支持、相互帮助，中国愿意同各国尤其是周边邻国共同发展、共同繁荣。	
We in China are striving to finish the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and realize the Chinese dream of the great national renewal. The Chinese dream is interconnected with the dreams of the people of all other countries. The Chinese people and the people of other countries should support and help each other to realize their respective dreams. China hopes to work with all the other countries, its neighbors in particular, to achieve common development and prosperity.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
为表彰和鼓励更多人士和团体坚持和弘扬和平共处五项原则，我愿宣布，中国政府决定设立“和平共处五项原则友谊奖”和“和平共处五项原则卓越奖学金”。	
In recognition of the commitment and contribution made by groups and individuals to the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence and encourage more people to join this noble cause, I now announce the decision of the Chinese government to establish the "Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Friendship Award" and the "Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Scholarship of Excellence".
中国有句古话：“千里之行，始于足下。”印度有句谚语：“水滴汇成溪，稻穗集成束。”缅甸人常说：“想，要凌云壮志；干，要脚踏实地。”中国将继续做弘扬和平共处五项原则的表率，同印度、缅甸和国际社会一道，推动建设持久和平、共同繁荣的和谐世界！	
An old Chinese adage says, "A journey of one thousand miles begins with the first step." An Indian proverb goes, "Drops of water join to make a stream, and ears combine to make a crop." And people in Myanmar often say, "Be ambitious in thinking but down-to-earth in action." China will strive to be a pacesetter in observing the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. We will work with India, Myanmar and the rest of the international community to build a harmonious world of durable peace and common prosperity.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
114. 习近平在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十五次会议上的讲话
团结互助 共迎挑战 推动上海合作组织实现新跨越
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十五次会议上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席
习近平
（2015年7月10日，乌法）
Strengthening Shanghai Cooperation Organization Through Unity, Mutual Support and Joint Response to Challenges
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 15th Meeting of the Council of the Heads of State of The Shanghai Cooperation Organization Member States
Ufa, 10 July 2015
尊敬的各位同事：	
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到美丽的乌法出席上海合作组织峰会。感谢东道主俄罗斯为这次峰会顺利举行所做的精心准备和周到安排。一年来，俄方作为主席国为深化上海合作组织各领域合作做了大量卓有成效的工作，为上海合作组织下阶段发展打下坚实基础。中方对此高度评价。
It gives me great pleasure to come to the beautiful city of Ufa to attend the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Summit. Let me thank our host, the Russian Federation, for its meticulous preparations and hospitality. We also applaud Russia for its effective work in the past year to promote SCO cooperation in various fields, which has laid a solid foundation for strengthening the SCO.
去年杜尚别峰会以来，上海合作组织成员国密切配合，相互支持，妥善因应形势变化，加大了维护本地区安全稳定力度，提高了成员国利益融合和交流合作水平，本组织吸引力和凝聚力持续增强。同时，也要看到，受国际和地区形势动荡、“三股势力”沆瀣合流、地区国家经济下行压力加大等内外因素影响，本地区安全稳定和经济发展都遇到相当多的困难和挑战，上海合作组织发展面临的外部形势不容乐观。
Since the last summit in Dushanbe, SCO member states have worked together to respond to changing developments through closer coordination and mutual support. Efforts have been intensified to maintain security and stability in our region. Mutual interests and cooperation among member states have expanded. The influence and cohesiveness of this organization continue to grow. On the other hand, given the fluid international and regional landscape, the convergence of the three forces and mounting downward pressure on the economy of countries in the region, our region faces multiple difficulties and challenges in promoting security, stability and economic growth. And we should not be overly optimistic about the general external environment of the SCO.
我们要加快步伐，切实行动，以上海合作组织至2025年发展战略为指导，在新起点上推动组织实现新跨越，为地区各国共同维护稳定和促进发展提供坚实保障和强大助力。
We need to move faster and take more concrete actions. We have reached a new departure point. We should, guided by the SCO Development Strategy Towards 2025, make the SCO cross new thresholds and make it an anchor and driver for promoting stability and development of the countries in the region.
第一，坚持“上海精神”，打造本地区命运共同体。15年来，互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”已经成为上海合作组织赖以生存发展的根基，代表了当今国际关系发展方向。
First, we should follow the Shanghai spirit to build a community of common destiny. Featuring mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respecting diverse civilizations and seeking common development, the Shanghai spirit has over the past 15 years underpinned the SCO's development and represents the trend in contemporary international relations.
今天，“上海精神”仍然具有时代意义。我们要继续以“上海精神”为指引，坚持上海合作组织一贯秉持的国际关系准则，维护国际公平正义，倡导多边主义和开放主义，相互尊重彼此利益，不干涉别国内政，以和平方式解决分歧争端，以共赢理念促进发展繁荣。要让“上海精神”在本地区更加深入人心、发扬光大，成为本组织成员国打造命运共同体、共建和谐家园的精神纽带。
Fifteen years on, the Shanghai spirit is still highly relevant. We should continue to observe it and other principles governing international relations championed by the SCO. We should uphold international equity and justice, promote multilateralism and openness, respect each other's interests, refrain from interfering in other country's internal affairs, settle disputes through peaceful means and seek common development and prosperity with a win-win approach. We should carry forward the Shanghai spirit in our region and make it an inspirational bond bringing member states together in our endeavor to build a community of common destiny and promote harmony in our region.
战争的惨痛教训不容忘记。今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利和联合国成立70周年。本组织成员国都经历了第二次世界大战血与火的考验，为战争胜利付出了巨大牺牲。各国元首将在峰会后发表关于世界反法西斯战争暨第二次世界大战胜利70周年的声明，发出呼唤和平的一致声音。我们要继续做捍卫第二次世界大战胜利成果的坚定力量，绝不允许任何人歪曲历史、践踏和平。
The painful lesson of war should never be forgotten. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the World Anti-Fascist War and the founding of the United Nations. All SCO member states endured the test of blood and fire of World War II and contributed to the final victory with enormous sacrifice. After this summit, we will issue a declaration commemorating the victory of the World Anti-Fascist War and World War II and make a joint call for peace. We will continue to be a staunch force for upholding the victorious outcomes of World War II and never allow anyone to distort history or undermine peace.
借此机会，我谨代表中方向在第二次世界大战中英勇战斗、为人类正义事业捐躯的烈士，表示深切的缅怀！向支援中国人民反抗日本军国主义侵略的国家和国际友人，表示衷心的感谢！
On behalf of China, I take this opportunity to pay deep tribute to all those who fought fearlessly and made the ultimate sacrifice for the noble cause of justice during World War II. I also extend my heartfelt appreciation to all the countries and foreign friends who supported the Chinese people in their struggle against Japanese militarist aggression.
第二，加强行动能力，筑牢地区安全屏障。维护地区安全稳定是本组织所有成员国共同关切。防止地区局势生乱、防范恐怖主义和宗教极端思想肆意蔓延、防止别有用心势力破坏地区和平稳定是本组织职责所在。
Second, we should strengthen capabilities to uphold security in our region. Upholding security and stability in our region is a common concern for all member states. The SCO has the responsibility to prevent instability, forestall the spread of terrorist and religious extremist ideologies and stop forces with hidden agenda from undermining peace and stability in our region.
我们要加强政策沟通和协调，研究应对举措，共同维护各成员国政权、制度、社会安全和稳定。
We should enhance policy consultation and coordination, study ways of responding to challenges and work together to uphold the government, system, security and stability of SCO member states.
我们要应对好阿富汗局势，加强同阿富汗安全合作，帮助阿富汗安全力量加强能力建设，在促进阿富汗实现民族和解和经济重建过程中发挥更大作用。
We should respond to new developments in Afghanistan, strengthen security cooperation with Afghanistan, help Afghan security forces build capacity, and play a bigger role in promoting national reconciliation and economic reconstruction in Afghanistan.
我们要强有力推进反恐、禁毒、防务合作，提高本组织安全行动能力，形成更严密健全的执法合作网络。加快在地区反恐怖机构基础上建立应对安全挑战和威胁中心，强化本组织禁毒职能，对本组织应对安全挑战具有迫切现实意义。中方欢迎成员国此次签署《边防合作协定》，完善本组织安全合作的法律基础，巩固成员国外部边界稳定，愿同各方加紧研究起草本组织《反极端主义公约》。
We should take strong measures to advance counter-terrorism, drug control and defense cooperation, increase SCO security operation capacity, and strengthen the network of law enforcement cooperation. We should, on the basis of the Regional Anti-Terrorism Structure, accelerate the building of a center for responding to security challenge and threat and enhance drug control functions of the SCO. This will be an urgently needed and effective step for the SCO to meet security challenges. China welcomes the signing of the Border Control Cooperation Agreement among member states, as this will improve the legal basis for SCO security cooperation and ensure border stability of member states. And China is ready to speed up study and drafting of the Anti-Extremism Convention of the SCO with other member states.
第三，深挖合作潜力，充实务实合作内容。寻求新的增长点、改善社会民生是本组织成员国的重大任务。上海合作组织应该推动各方在互利共赢基础上，创造更多合作机遇，推动区域经济合作取得早期收获。
Third, we should tap potential for cooperation and enrich practical cooperation. To seek new growth areas and improve people's livelihood is a major task for SCO member states. On the basis of promoting mutual benefit, the SCO should encourage its member states to create more cooperation opportunities and strive for early harvest in regional economic cooperation.
我们要在贸易和投资便利化自由化方面迈出更大步伐。应该扩大贸易规模，优化贸易结构，制定共同措施，协调经贸、海关、质检、运输等领域政策。
We should take even bigger steps to promote trade and investment facilitation and liberalization. It is important for us to expand trade volume, improve trade structure, adopt common measures, and harmonize business, customs, quality inspection and transport policies.
交通设施互联互通是区域合作的优先领域和重要基础。各方应积极参与上海合作组织公路协调发展规划的制订工作，加快实施成员国间道路运输便利化协定。中方愿同各方加强合作，优先实施已经达成共识的互联互通项目，为项目可行性研究和规划提供资金支持，参与设计和建设的投融资合作。在未来几年，推动建成4000公里铁路、超过10000公里公路，基本形成区域内互联互通格局。
Transport infrastructure connectivity is a priority area and important basis for enhancing regional cooperation. The SCO member states should take an active part in the formulation of the SCO Plan for the Coordinated Development of Roads, and accelerate the implementation of the Road Transport Facilitation Agreement. China is ready to step up cooperation with other member states, carry out agreed connectivity projects on a priority basis, provide funding support for the feasibility study and planning of projects, and participate in investment and financing cooperation of the design and construction of projects. In the next few years, we will build 4,000 kilometers of railways and over 10,000 kilometers of roads, thus basically forming a regional connectivity architecture.
开展成员国间投资、产能、装备、基础设施建设合作，对培育新的经济增长点、扩大就业具有重要现实意义。中国同哈萨克斯坦等国已经就有关合作达成共识。成员国可以利用互补优势，在平等互利基础上开展联合生产，并将产品推向国际市场。中方愿根据市场原则，推动在每个成员国建立合作园区，不断深化产能合作。
To conduct cooperation in investment, production capacity, equipment and infrastructure development between member states is important to fostering new growth areas and creating more jobs. China has reached cooperation agreement with Kazakhstan and other countries in this area. The member states may leverage complementary strengths, carry out joint production on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, and introduce such products to the international market. China will work for the establishment of cooperation zones in each member state and deepen production capacity cooperation on the basis of market operation.
成立上海合作组织开发银行是促进本组织多边合作的战略举措，对组织未来发展意义深远。我们应该坚持这一方向，争取早日建成本组织自有融资平台，为多边普惠项目和各国经济发展服务。现阶段，中方愿通过丝路基金、中国－欧亚经济合作基金等金融平台，解决上海合作组织成员国投资需求，结合《2017至2021年上海合作组织进一步推动项目合作的措施清单》，重点在重大基础设施项目、资源开发、产业和金融合作等领域开展投资合作。
To establish the SCO development bank is a strategic measure to promote multilateral cooperation within the organization, and it has far-reaching significance for its future development. We should keep working on it and set up an SCO financing platform at an early date, so as to support multilateral inclusive financing projects and economic development of various countries. China is ready to use financing platforms such as the Silk Road Fund and the China-Eurasia Economic Cooperation Fund to meet the investment needs of SCO member states. We should give priority to investment cooperation in major infrastructure projects, resource development, and industrial and financial cooperation in accordance with the List of Measures by the SCO to Further Promote Project Cooperation 2017-2021.
中方正在落实3年内为上海合作组织成员国培训2000名人才的计划。同时，中方还将在产业规划、项目可行性研究、咨询等领域提供技术援助，提高各国能力建设水平。	
China is implementing a plan to train 2,000 personnel for SCO member states in three years. It will also provide technical assistance in industrial planning, project feasibility study, consulting and other areas to help member states bolster capacity-building.
我们应该加强各国能源政策沟通，制定跨国油气管道安保合作具体措施。要继续扩大农产品贸易，开展农林牧渔合作，共同保障粮食安全。中方愿继续利用中方资金，为成员国培训农业技术人员，提高各国农业技术和粮食生产水平。中方建议制定“上海合作组织科技伙伴计划”，加快推动环保信息共享平台建设，愿同各国一道，发挥好上海合作组织实业家委员会、银行联合体等机制作用。	
We should enhance communication on energy policy, and introduce specific measures for enhancing cooperation on security of transnational oil and gas pipelines. We need to expand trade in agricultural produce and foster cooperation in agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishery to ensure food security. China will continue to train agricultural technicians for member states with its own fund to improve agro-technology and grain production of member states. China proposes the formulation of an SCO scientific and technological partnership program and the establishment of a platform for sharing information on environmental protection. We will work with other member states to fully leverage the role of SCO Entrepreneurs Committee and the Inter-Bank Consortium.
在各方支持和响应下，中方提出的共建丝绸之路经济带倡议得以顺利实施。我们希望丝绸之路经济带建设同上海合作组织各国发展规划相辅相成，将同有关国家一道，实施好丝绸之路经济带同欧亚经济联盟对接，促进欧亚地区平衡发展。	
With the positive response and support of all parties, the initiative of jointly building the Silk Road Economic Belt proposed by China is well underway. We hope that this initiative and the development plans of member states will complement each other; and we will work with relevant countries to form synergy between this initiative and the Eurasian Economic Union so as to advance the balanced development of Eurasia.
第四，推动民心相通，巩固世代睦邻友好。古老的丝绸之路见证了各国人民结下的深厚传统友谊。我们应该继续弘扬丝路精神，夯实本地区各国友好交往的民意基础，让各国人民互信互敬，共建和谐、安宁、繁荣的家园。	
Fourth, we should increase understanding between our peoples and foster enduring friendship. The ancient silk road bears testimony to the profound friendship of our peoples. We should carry forward the silk road spirit and enhance public support for our friendship. With mutual trust and respect between our peoples, we will be able to build a harmonious, peaceful and prosperous homeland.
中方支持拓宽本组织各国民间和社会交流渠道，深化文化、教育、卫生、旅游、体育、媒体等各领域交流合作。为加强青年交往，中方将在邀请上海合作组织国家青年领导人访华研修计划的基础上，自2016年起连续5年在华举办“上海合作组织青年交流营”，每年邀请本组织国家200名青年代表参加活动。应中方邀请，去年塔吉克斯坦198名中小学生赴华参加了夏令营活动。今年，包括来自峰会举办地乌法市的俄罗斯200名中小学生将赴华。中方将在2018年前完成为成员国2000名中小学生举办夏令营活动。	
China supports expanding the scope of people-to-people exchange and deepening communication and cooperation in areas such as culture, education, health, tourism, sports and media. To boost youth exchange, China will, in addition to providing training for young leaders from member states, host an SCO youth exchange camp in China for five consecutive years starting from 2016 with 200 young people participating annually. Last year, 198 middle and primary school students from Tajikistan were invited to join a summer camp program in China. This year, 200 middle and primary school students from our host city Ufa will visit China. By 2018, China will have hosted summer camps for 2,000 middle and primary school students from SCO member states.
2014年，中国海外旅游等出境人数突破l亿人次。俄罗斯、乌兹别克斯坦已经是中国公民出境旅游目的地国。我们愿同上海合作组织其他国家共同分享中国出境旅游发展给各国经济带来的巨大机遇，也希望各国简化中国公民赴有关国家签证手续。	
In 2014, over 100 million overseas visits were made by people from China. Russia and Uzbekistan are both now tourist destinations for Chinese citizens. We are ready to share with other member states the immense economic opportunities created by Chinese overseas tourists, and hope that they will streamline visa procedures for Chinese citizens.
中国支持各国加强司法交流合作，愿依托中国－上海合作组织国际司法交流合作培训基地，协助成员国培训司法人才。	
China supports greater judicial exchange and cooperation among SCO members and will assist other member states in training judicial personnel through the China-SCO International Judicial Exchange and Training Center.
中方支持成员国在紧急救灾、传染病防治、便利人员往来等领域继续加强合作，愿同各国研究探讨中医药合作、简化人员签证和劳务许可手续等举措。	
China supports enhanced cooperation among SCO members in areas such as disaster relief, epidemic prevention and treatment and facilitation of people-to-people exchange. We will discuss with other member states ways of boosting cooperation in traditional Chinese medicine and measures to streamline procedures for visa application and work permit.
第五，保持开放互鉴，推动组织发展。本次峰会后，本组织将启动接收印度、巴基斯坦为新成员的程序。我们也欢迎白俄罗斯成为本组织观察员国，阿塞拜疆、亚美尼亚、柬埔寨、尼泊尔成为对话伙伴国。中方相信，新生力量的加入将给上海合作组织各领域合作注入新动力。	
Fifth, we should boost the growth of the SCO with an open mind and through mutual learning. After this summit, the SCO will launch the process of admitting India and Pakistan as new members. We also welcome Belarus as an observer state and Azerbaijan, Armenia, Cambodia and Nepal as dialogue partners to the SCO. China believes that their participation will inject fresh vitality into SCO cooperation across the board.
我们要支持本组织继续扩大对外交往，密切同联合国、独联体、欧亚经济联盟、集安条约组织、东盟、亚信等国际和地区多边机制的联系和合作，交流互鉴，取长补短。	
We need to support the SCO in expanding its contacts with other organizations and forging closer ties and cooperation with the UN, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Eurasian Economic Union, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia and other international and regional multilateral mechanisms to benefit more from mutual learning.
我们要深入研究如何加强同观察员国、对话伙伴合作问题，继续健全相应对话和合作机制，使上海合作组织发展成果更多惠及观察员国和对话伙伴，实现优势互补，成果共享。
We need to study ways to strengthen cooperation with observer states and dialogue partners and improve relevant dialogue and cooperation mechanisms, so that observer states and dialogue partners will benefit more from the SCO through drawing on each other's strengths and sharing the fruits of development.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
我相信，只要我们继续秉持“上海精神”，团结互助，就一定能够推动上海合作组织在新的历史条件下，百尺竿头、更进一步，实现新的跨越和发展！	
It is my conviction that by upholding the Shanghai spirit and acting with unity and mutual support, we will surely enable the SCO to grow from strength to strength and make new strides in a new historical stage.
谢谢各位。	
Thank you.
113. 习近平在中美省州长论坛上的讲话
在中美省州长论坛上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
2015年9月22日，西雅图
Address by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the China-U.S. Governors Forum
Seattle, 22 September 2015
尊敬的加利福尼亚州布朗州长，　　
尊敬的华盛顿州英斯利州长，　　
尊敬的艾奥瓦州布兰斯塔德州长，　　
尊敬的密歇根州斯奈德州长，　　
尊敬的俄勒冈州布朗州长，　　
中方各位省市负责同志，　　
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Governor Jerry Brown of California,
Governor Jay Inslee of Washington,
Governor Terry Branstad of Iowa,
Governor Rick Snyder of Michigan,
Governor Kate Brown of Oregon,
Leaders of provinces and states,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
很高兴出席第三届中美省州长论坛。首先，我对论坛的成功举办，表示热烈的祝贺！对各位省州负责人长期以来为促进中美关系发展作出的积极努力，表示高度的赞赏！	
It gives me great pleasure to attend the third China-U.S. Governors' Forum. Let me first of all extend warm congratulations on the successful opening of the forum and express my deep appreciation to leaders of provinces and states for your hard work over the years to promote China-U.S. relations.
刚才，我认真听了你们的发言，大家讲得都很好。每次同中美地方负责人交流，我都很受启发。2012年，我访美时曾在洛杉矶出席中美省州长见面会。2013年，我在北京会见了参加第二届省州长论坛的双方代表。大家畅谈地方合作，为发展两国关系献计献策，我至今记忆犹新。	
Just now, I listened attentively to your remarks. You all made very good points. Every time I interact with local leaders of China and the United States, I get much food for thought. During my visit to the United States in 2012, I attended a meeting between Chinese and American governors in Los Angeles. In 2013, I met with delegates of the second Chinese-U.S. Governors' Forum in Beijing. I still remember our conversations on sub-national cooperation. And your ideas on how to grow the relations between the two countries were still fresh in my memory.
我曾长期在地方工作，深知地方领导责任之重、工作之不易，也深知地方合作对发展国家关系有着重要作用。国与国关系归根结底需要人民支持，最终也服务于人民。地方是最贴近老百姓的。地方合作搞得好不好，关系国家层面的合作能否落地生根。为此，我一直高度重视中美地方合作。过去30多年，中美关系发展得益于两国地方和人民支持，未来仍然要依靠地方、造福地方。	
Having worked for many years in local governments myself, I fully understand how challenging it is to be local leaders, as the job carries immense responsibilities. I am also deeply aware of the importance of sub-national cooperation to the growth of overall relations between countries. State-to-state relations ultimately rely on the support of the people and serve the people. Provinces and states are closest to the people. Without successful cooperation at the sub-national level, it would be very difficult to achieve practical results for cooperation at the national level. That is why I place great importance on China-U.S. sub-national cooperation. Over the past 30 plus years, the growth of our relations has been achieved with support of local governments and their people. Going forward, it will continue to draw strength from and deliver benefits to them.
我高兴地看到，近年来，中美地方交流合作呈现新的蓬勃发展态势。中国31个省区市同美国50个州建立了43对友好省州、200对友好城市。过去10年，美国42个州对华出口增幅达到3位数。据美方统计，中国过去5年对美投资年均超过80多亿美元，增速还在加快。今天来的美国5个州，中国都是你们位列前四位的出口市场和主要留学生来源国。与会的中国6个省市，有的以美国为第一大贸易伙伴，有的吸引数以千计的美国企业投资，有的一年对美国贸易额增幅就超过40%。这些交流合作造福了两国人民。	
The new momentum of dynamic growth of sub-national exchanges and cooperation between our two countries has been truly encouraging. Thirty-one Chinese provinces/regions/cities have established 43 sister province/state relations and 200 sister-city relations with 50 American states. Over the past 10 years, 42 American states have achieved triple-digit increases in their export to China. According to statistics of the American side, Chinese investment to the U.S. over the past five years has expanded by over eight billion dollars on average every year and the pace is still getting faster. For the five American states represented here, China is among your top four export markets and a major source of international students. Among the six Chinese provinces and cities around the table, some have the U.S. as their largest trading partner, some have attracted tens of hundreds of American businesses, and some registered a 40 percent increase in their trade with the U.S. in one single year. Exchanges and cooperations as such have truly benefited people of the two countries.
当前，中美关系总体保持稳定发展，各领域务实合作全面深化。我这次来，希望同奥巴马总统和美国社会各界深入交流，规划两国关系发展蓝图。从国际上看，经济全球化继续深入发展，产业升级酝酿新突破，各种生产要素在世界范围内加快流动。在上述背景下，两国地方交流合作有着更加广阔的天地。	
China-U.S. relations have, on the whole, maintained steady growth, with deepening practical cooperation in all areas. During the visit, I hope to have in-depth exchanges with President Obama and people of all sectors of American society and draw a blueprint for the future development of our relations. As economic globalization continues to deepen, new breakthroughs in industrial upgrading are in the making, and factors of production are flowing at a faster pace across borders. These have provided broader space for sub-national exchanges and cooperation between the two countries.
首先，双方要有效利用中美两国经济巨大体量带来的机遇。规模就是商机。中美坐拥世界前两大经济体地位，这本身就是省州开展合作的巨大宝藏。美国作为世界第一大经济体，拥有广大的市场空间，吸纳外部商品、投资、人才的能力极强。从中国看，我们有13亿多人口，山东、四川两省人口都接近一个亿，在座6省市人口加起来相当于全美国人口的总数。我们正在大力推进新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化，实施创新驱动发展战略，这一进程将对外部商品、技术、服务产生海量需求。未来5年，预计中国将进口10万亿美元商品，对外投资将超过5000亿美元，出境旅游人数将超过5亿人次。我们欢迎美国各州同中国地方加强合作。	
First, the two sides need to tap into opportunities emanating from our huge economic aggregates. A big size means tremendous business opportunities. China and the U.S. are the world's two largest economies. This is in itself a treasure house for cooperation between our provinces and states. As the world's largest economy, the U.S. has a huge market and a strong capability to attract foreign products, investment and talents to its shores. In China, we have a population of over 1.3 billion. The provinces of Shandong and Sichuan each have a population of around 100 million. And the six Chinese provinces and cities represented here have a combined population roughly the same as that of the U.S.. We in China are pursuing a new type of industrialization, IT development, urbanization and agricultural modernization, and implementing a strategy of innovation-driven development. This process will generate enormous demands for products, technologies and services from abroad. In the next five years, China is expected to import 10 trillion U.S. dollars of products and invest over 500 billion dollars overseas; and outbound visits by the Chinese people will exceed 500 million. We welcome closer cooperation between American states and their counterparts in China.
第二，双方要共同分享中美两国改革发展的政策利好。变革是当今世界的潮流。中国将坚定不移继续改革开放，中国各地正在进行各方面改革开放的探索。美国努力调整经济结构，采取“再工业化”、制造业回流等政策，制定了很多鼓励科技创新、产业升级的战略规划，推动经济持续复苏。一些州出台了不少招商引资的办法，条件甚至比我们上世纪80年代还优惠。这都会创造合作机遇。我们鼓励更多中国地方到美国开展更高水平的交流合作，实现自身发展，也进一步造福当地社会。	
Second, the two sides need to take advantage of favorable policies of reform and development introduced by the two countries. Reform is a prevailing trend in today's world. China will stay committed to reform and opening-up, and Chinese provinces and cities are doing their part in pursuing reform and opening-up in various aspects. The U.S. is restructuring its economy, re-industrializing and re-shoring its manufacturing sector. To ensure sustained economic recovery, it has made strategic plans to spur scientific and technological innovation and industrial upgrading. Some states have introduced measures to attract investment, which are even more favorable than what we implemented in the 1980s. These will create opportunities for cooperation. We encourage more Chinese provinces and cities to come to the U.S. for exchanges and cooperation at a higher level to develop themselves and deliver more benefits to the local communities.
中国正在制定“十三五”时期经济社会发展规划。我们将着力实行新一轮高水平对外开放，加快建立开放型经济新体制。这方面，我们鼓励一些有条件的地区先行先试。比如，我们在上海、广东、天津、福建设立4个自由贸易试验区，采取准入前国民待遇加负面清单的管理模式；在北京市开展金融、旅游、医疗等6个服务业领域对外资开放试点，等等。我们将采取有力措施促进国内区域协调发展、城乡协调发展，加快欠发达地区发展。我们将加快推进“一带一路”建设，为国内各地区拓展对外合作搭建平台。比如，新疆是丝绸之路经济带“核心区域”，云南是“一带一路”向西南开放的“桥头堡”。“一带一路”欢迎包括美国在内的世界各国积极参与。这些措施将为中美地方合作创造机遇。	
China is formulation its 13th Five-Year Plan for economic and social development. We will focus on a new round of opening-up at a higher level and speed up efforts to build an open economy. In the regard, we encourage well-placed provinces and cities to try out certain reforms measures. For example, we have established four pilot free trade zones in Shanghai, Guangdong, Tianjin and Fujian based on a management model of pre-establishment national treatment and negative list. In Beijing, we have, on a trial basis, opened up six service sectors including finance, tourism and healthcare to foreign investors. We will take effective measures to ensure coordinated development between different regions and urban and rural areas, and accelerate the development of underdeveloped regions. We will advance the "Belt and Road" Initiative at a faster pace to build platforms for different parts of China to expand their external cooperation. For instance, Xinjiang is a core area of the Silk Road economic belt and Yunnan is a gateway to the southwest under the "Belt and Road" Initiative. The U.S. and other countries are welcome to actively participate in the "Belt and Road" Initiative. All these measures will create opportunities for China-U.S. sub-national cooperation.
第三，双方要努力发掘中美地方优势互补的潜能。发挥优势是合作成功的关键。中美各地优势领域各具特色，互补性很强。双方应该因地制宜，“八仙过海，各显神通”。比如，艾奥瓦州有“美国粮仓”之称，俄勒冈州也是美国的重要农业区，可以同陕西、河北、黑龙江等中国农业大省加强合作。加利福尼亚州的惠普公司在重庆建有全球电脑生产基地，双方可以围绕信息产业深化合作。密歇根州是美国最大的机动车生产地，中方在座的六省市都在积极发展汽车工业，双方可以探讨开展更多合作项目。双方还可以积极探索开辟第三方市场。	
Third, the two sides need to unlock more local potentials for complementary cooperation. The key to successful cooperation is to leverage our respective strengths. Many areas in China and the U.S. boast unique local strengths, which are highly complementary. We need to make full use of these strengths in our cooperation. Just as a Chinese saying goes, "When eight immortals crossed the sea, each showed their own magic." Take agricultural cooperation as an example. Iowa is known as the "granary of the U.S." and Oregon is also a major agricultural producer. These two states can strengthen their cooperation with big agricultural producers like Shaanxi, Hebei and Heilongjiang provinces. California's HP has set up a global computer production center in Chongqing, where further cooperation in IT industry and be expected. Michigan, as the largest motor vehicles producer of the U.S., can also explore cooperation with China. In fact, Michigan may start with the six Chinese provinces and cities present today, as they all have a booming car industry. And the two sides can explore cooperation in a third market.
中国正在大力推进生态文明建设。这也是我们“十三五”规划的一个重点方向。粗略计算，我们这些年每年环保投入近2000亿美元，各地环保投入都在快速增长。这方面中国有需要、有市场，美国有技术、有经验。华盛顿州在环保、海岸带保护等方面有优势，就可以同中国一些环保投入大省或沿海省份加强合作。前不久在洛杉矶举办的首届中美气候智慧型／低碳城市峰会效果也很好，很多地方省州减排目标走在了国家目标的前头，发挥着率先引领作用。这种努力值得肯定和鼓励。两国地方环保领域交流合作理应成为中美合力应对气候变化、推进可持续发展的一个重要方面。	
China is making great effort to protect the eco-system, which is a priority in its 13th Five-Year Plan. According to initial estimates, China's annual input into environmental protection in the past few years approached 200 billion dollars. At the local level, environmental input is also rising rapidly. China has the demand and the market, while the U.S. has the technology and the expertise. Washington, with its strengths in environmental protection, coastline protection in particular, can step up its cooperation with those Chinese provinces that invest heavily in this area or coastal provinces in China. The first China-U.S. Climate Leaders Summit recently held in Los Angeles was as great success. Many of our provinces or states are playing an exemplary role by setting emissions reduction targets more ambitious than national ones. Such efforts need to be recognized and encouraged. Exchange and cooperation in environmental protection at the local level should be part and parcel of our joint efforts to address climate change and promote sustainable development.
我高度重视中美人文交流。“亲戚越走越近，朋友越走越亲。”中美民众往来越频繁，两国友好的基础就越坚实，务实合作就越红火。各省州应该在教育、旅游、体育、青年等广泛领域开展交流合作，支持社会各界和民众多走动、常来往。	
I deeply value the cultural and people-to-people exchanges between our two countries. Relatives and friends become closer if they visit each other more. This is also true for Chinese and Americans. Exchanges bring deeper friendship and more vigorous practical cooperation. Local governments from both sides need to engage each other extensively in areas like education, tourism, sports and youth and encourage more interactions between people from all walks of life.
就业是各位省州长高度关注的问题，我们要通过开展这些合作，促进增长，创造就业，使人民受益。	
I know as governors, your are most concerned about employment. Cooperation in the above-mentioned areas will promote growth and create jobs, thus bringing benefits to our peoples.
今天来的中国省市，每家都有几十、上百所高等院校，有的省在校生数量超过百万。2006年，我在浙江工作时，出席了温州大学和美国肯恩大学合作创办温州肯恩大学的签字仪式。经过多年努力，温州肯恩大学去年正式设立，目前运转良好。浙江省还有近百所中小学同美国各地学校结成姐妹关系，往来活跃。双方应该探索形式多样的教育合作，共同培养面向未来的高素质人才。中方将在未来3年内资助两国共5万名留学生到对方国家学习，美国也将努力在2020年前实现百万名美国学生学中文，两国将在2016年举办旅游年。这些举措将为两国各省州加强人文交流提供更多平台。希望大家一道努力，把中美民间友好的桥梁筑得更宽、更牢。	
The Chinese provinces and cities represented today are each home to dozens of, or even over a hundred, universities. In some provinces, university students number over a million. When I was Governor of Zhejiang back in 2006, I attended a signing ceremony for a joint initiative between Wenzhou University and Kean University to establish the Wenzhou-Kean University. After years of efforts, this university was finally up and running last year and is making good progress today. Also in Zhejiang, nearly 100 primary and secondary schools have established sister-school relationships with their U.S. counterparts with robust exchanges. We also need to explore various ways of education cooperation and nurture high-caliber people that meet the need of our societies in the future. In the next three years, China will support a total of 50,000 Chinese and American students to study in each other's countries, and the U.S. will provide opportunities to as many as one million American students to learn Chinese by 2020. We will hold the Chinese-U.S. Tourism Year in 2016. These measures will provide more platforms for greater cultural and people-to-people exchanges at the sub-national level. I hope that we can all add building blocks to the bridge of Chinese-American friendship.
中国人常说“只争朝夕”。西方人则讲究“行事要趁机会好”。中美地方合作正当其时。希望各位积极推动两国各省州抓住机遇、乘势而上，共同谱写中美地方合作新篇章。	
Chinese people often say, "Seize the moment", while westerners believe in "making hay while the sun shines." Now is the prime time for China-U.S. sub-national cooperation. I hope your will seize the moment, build on the momentum and work together to write a new chapter of China-U.S. sub-national cooperation.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
97. 习近平在中非企业家大会上的讲话
携手共进，谱写中非合作新篇章
——在中非企业家大会上的讲话
（2015年12月4日，约翰内斯堡）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Working Together to Write a New Chapter In China-Africa Cooperation
Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the China-Africa Business Forum
Johannesburg, 4 December 2015
尊敬的祖马总统，
尊敬的非洲联盟轮值主席穆加贝总统，
尊敬的各国元首、政府首脑，
尊敬的非盟委员会主席祖马女士，
尊敬的各位同事，各位嘉宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency President Zuma,
Your Excellency President Mugabe, Rotating Chairperson of the African Union,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellency Dr. Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Dear Colleagues,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
有机会在美丽的约翰内斯堡同大家见面，我感到十分高兴。这次中非企业家大会以“合作共赢，共同发展——助推非洲一体化和工业化进程”为主题，对非洲的包容性和可持续发展具有现实意义。在此，我谨对大会的成功召开，表示热烈的祝贺！对长期以来在中非经贸合作中作出贡献的各界朋友，表示衷心的感谢！	
It gives me great pleasure to meet all of you here in this beautiful city of Johannesburg. This Forum, with the theme of "China-Africa Cooperation for Common Development - Catapulting the African Industrialization Renaissance", is highly relevant for the inclusive and sustainable development of the African continent. Here, I wish to extend my warmest congratulations on the successful convocation of the Forum and my heartfelt appreciation to friends of all sectors that have made contribution over the years to trade and economic cooperation between China and Africa.
中国和非洲虽然远隔万里，但中非交往源远流长，中非友谊历久弥坚。今天的非洲充满了生机活力，中非经贸合作达到了前所未有的高度。众多中国企业家到非洲开展投资经营，越来越多的非洲朋友去中国经商工作。在我曾经工作过的浙江省，有个小城叫义乌，号称世界“小商品之都”，现在有几千名非洲商人常驻那里，从事中非贸易。	
Though geographically far apart, China and Africa enjoy a long history of exchanges and a friendship that has stood the test of time. Today's Africa is brimming with vigor and vitality, and business cooperation between our two sides has reached an unprecedented level. A large number of Chinese entrepreneurs have come to Africa for investment and business ventures, while more and more African friends are working and doing business in China. In Zhejiang, a province where I used to work, there is a small city called Yiwu, now well known as the world's "capital of small commodities". Several thousand businessmen from Africa are based there, engaging in China-Africa trade.
截至2014年底，中国对非洲各类投资存量达1010亿美元，在非洲建立企业3100多家；2014年，中非贸易额达到2219亿美元。中国在贸易、投资、基础设施建设、经贸合作园区等领域已经成为非洲主要合作伙伴。	
By the end of 2014, the total stock of Chinese investment in Africa had reached US$101 billion, resulting in more than 3,100 Africa-based enterprises. Two-way trade reached US$221.9 billion in 2014. China has become Africa's principal cooperation partner in such areas as trade, investment, infrastructural development and economic cooperation parks.
当前，世界经济形势复杂多变，发达国家经济复苏乏力，新兴市场国家经济增长放缓，全球经济增长不稳定不确定性风险加大。然而，非洲作为发展中国家最多的大陆，近年来成为全球经济的一个亮点。	
At present, the situation facing the world economy is both complex and fluid, with weak recovery in developed countries, economic slowdown in emerging markets and increasing risks of uncertainty and instability in global economic growth. But, Africa, the continent that has more developing countries than any other, has distinguished itself as an economic bright spot in recent years.
目前，非洲安全局势总体稳定，各国政府均将发展经济作为核心任务，制定了雄心勃勃的经济、产业、基础设施发展规划，非洲大陆年均经济增速接近5%。非洲方兴未艾的工业化和城市化进程为全球经济增长注入了新动力，使非洲成为增长最快和最有希望的大陆。
The security situation in Africa has been generally stable. Taking economic development as their central task, governments in Africa have formulated ambitious economic, industrial and infrastructure development plans, prompting an average annual growth rate of nearly 5% on the continent. Africa's vibrant process of industrialization and urbanization has injected fresh dynamism into global economic growth and made it the fastest growing and most promising continent in the world.
纵观近代世界经济发展史，中国和许多国家的经验证明，工业化是一个国家经济发展的必由之路。中国一个半世纪的工业化历程充满艰辛和曲折。早在19世纪中叶，中国在列强坚船利炮撞击之下，被迫打开国门，开始了被称为“洋务运动”的早期工业化。改革开放以后，中国驶入工业化的快速路。中国用了短短几十年时间，走过了发达国家几百年的历程，建成了体系完整、产能巨大的工业体系，成为世界制造业第一大国和全球第二大经济体，成功探索出一条符合中国国情的工业化道路。	
Looking at the modern history of world economic development and the experiences of China and many other countries, we can say for sure that industrialization is an inevitable path to a country's economic success. China has gone through a hard and tortuous journey of industrialization for the past century and a half. Back in the mid 19th century, the overwhelming military might of foreign powers forced China to open its door and began what was called "self-strengthening movement" in an early form of industrialization. Since the beginning of reform and opening-up, China has embarked on a fast track of industrialization. Within a short span of several decades, China has accomplished what took developed countries hundreds of years to accomplish and put in place a complete industrial system with an enormous production capacity. By becoming the world's largest manufacturing country and second largest economy, China has testified to the success of its probe for an industrialization path suited to its national conditions.
回顾中国工业化历程，我们深刻认识到，搞好工业化，闭门造车不行，经济全球化时代的工业化需要利用好国内国外两个市场、两种资源，发挥好自身比较优势，实现资源全球配置。要充分借鉴和吸收先进国家的经验，根据本国国情选择适合自身特点的工业化道路。非洲作为全球发展潜力最大的地区，完全可以发挥优势，大有作为。	
Looking at China's journey of industrialization, we have keenly recognized that industrialization cannot be achieved behind closed doors. Industrialization in the age of economic globalization requires that we take full advantage of both domestic and international markets and both home and overseas resources, put our comparative advantages to the best use and realize the global allocation of resources. What is more, we should draw on as much as possible the experience of the advanced countries, and choose an industrialization path suited to our national features and conditions. It is entirely possible for Africa, as the world's most promising region in terms of development potential, to bring into play its advantages and achieve great success.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
工业化是非洲实现包容性和可持续发展的前提，是创造就业、消除贫困、提高生活水平的关键。非洲工业化之路，需要非洲人民去实践、去探索。中国真诚希望同非洲国家分享中国经验，愿为非洲工业化进程提供资金、技术、人才支持。在工业、基础设施建设、投资和贸易便利化等领域，中非合作将为双方企业投资和贸易提供更多机会，从而提高非洲产业竞争力，弥补非洲基础设施缺口；在现代农业、绿色发展、减贫惠民等方面的合作，将促进中非企业分享先进技术和建立可持续发展模式，增强自主发展能力，提高公共治理水平，改善非洲人民生活。	
The achievement of inclusive and sustainable development in Africa hinges on industrialization which holds the key to creating jobs, eradicating poverty and improving people's living standards. Africa's path of industrialization can only be found by African people through their own practice and exploration. It is China's sincere hope to share its experience with African countries, and we are willing to provide capital, technology and personnel in support of African industrialization. In the areas of industry, infrastructure building, and investment and trade facilitation, China-Africa cooperation will create more investment and trade opportunities for companies of the two sides, thus enhancing the competitiveness of African industries and closing the infrastructure gap in Africa. In the fields of modern agriculture, green development, poverty reduction and people's welfare, China-Africa cooperation will enable companies from the two sides to share advanced know-how, and help African countries establish a sustainable development model, enhance their independent development capacity, improve their public governance and raise the quality of life of the African people.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
新形势带来新机遇，中非应该继承真诚友好的光荣传统，把互助合作精神发扬光大。为加强中非友好合作，我提出以下建议。	
With new circumstances come new opportunities. China and Africa should embrace our proud tradition of sincere friendship and enhance mutual assistance and cooperation. To this end, I wish to make the following proposals:
第一，坚持互利共赢的平等合作。中非双方应该坚持义利并举原则，从中非发展实际出发，相互考虑对方关切，寻找和扩大利益交集，共同打造中非命运共同体。	
First, we must go for win-win cooperation based on equality. Both China and Africa should uphold the values of friendship, justice and shared interests, bear in mind their realities and each other's concerns, seek and expand converging interests and jointly build a community of shared future for China and Africa.
第二，坚持开放包容的多方合作。当今世界已经发展成为密切联系的整体。我们主张全球经济开放包容，坚决反对贸易和投资保护主义。中非经贸合作是开放的合作，欢迎其他国家的企业在互利共赢基础上，加入到中非合作中来。	
Second, we must go for multilateral cooperation that is open and inclusive. Our world has already become a closely interconnected whole. We want to see an open and inclusive global economy and reject trade and investment protectionism. As China-Africa economic cooperation is open, companies from other countries are welcome to get involved on the basis of mutual benefit.
第三，坚持能力导向的务实合作。中方愿意毫无保留地同非方分享先进适用技术，愿意将中国优势产业同非洲发展需要相结合，深化产业合作，促进非洲劳动力素质提高，创造就业，增强非洲经济发展内生动力。我们将通过派遣专家、建立职业培训中心、加强中非人才培训和企业家交流，切实帮助非洲解决工业化人才需求和能力建设问题。	
Third, we must go for practical cooperation aimed at capacity building. China is ready to share, without any reservation, advanced applicable technology with Africa and combine Chinese competitive industries with African needs for development to deepen industrial cooperation. This will help enhance the quality of the African workforce, and create more jobs and strengthen Africa's internal drive for economic development. We will send over more experts, set up more vocational training centers and strengthen personnel training and entrepreneurial exchanges to earnestly meet African needs for well-trained personnel and capacity building in industrialization.
第四，坚持绿色低碳可持续发展。非洲拥有丰富的自然资源和优越的生态环境，中非合作要把可持续发展放在第一位。我们将为非洲国家实施应对气候变化及生态保护项目，为非洲国家培训生态保护领域专业人才，帮助非洲走绿色低碳可持续发展道路。	
Fourth, we must go for green, low-carbon and sustainable development. As Africa boasts rich natural resources and a superb ecological environment, we should give top priority to sustainable development in China-Africa cooperation. We will launch projects for African countries to cope with climate change and better protect the ecology, train more African professionals in environmental protection and help Africa embark on the path of green, low-carbon and sustainable development.
第五，坚持基础优先的重点合作。我们将对中非全方位经贸合作进行整体规划设计，支持非洲国家农田水利建设，强化交通基础设施和动力保障，大力支持中小企业发展和减贫惠民项目建设，让中非合作造福于民，惠及全民。	
Fifth, we must go for priority cooperation with focus on the fundamental aspects. We will make an overall design for the all-round business cooperation between China and Africa, help African countries in farmland and water conservancy projects, strengthen transportation, infrastructure and power supply, and support SMEs and programs of poverty reduction and people's welfare, thus delivering tangible benefits of China-Africa cooperation to all the people.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
企业家是中非经贸合作的主体，是推动中非友谊的使者。我衷心希望广大中非企业家担负起中非经贸全方位合作的重担，勇于创新，互相借鉴，共同为创造中非人民的美好未来而努力！	
Entrepreneurs are the main players in China-Africa business cooperation as well as promoters of China-Africa friendship. I sincerely hope that Chinese and African entrepreneurs will shoulder the responsibility of all-round business cooperation between the two sides, be prepared to blaze new trails and learn from each other, and work together to bring about a better future for the Chinese and African peoples.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
104. 习近平在二十国集团领导人第十次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
创新增长路径 共享发展成果
——在二十国集团领导人第十次峰会第一阶段会议上
关于世界经济形势的发言
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年11月15日，安塔利亚）
Innovative Growth That Benefits All
-- Remarks on the World Economy
By H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Session I of the 10th G20 Summit
Antalya, 15 November 2015
尊敬的埃尔多安总统，
各位同事：	
President Erdogan,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴在安塔利亚再次同大家见面。首先，我谨对埃尔多安总统和土方的热情周到接待，表示衷心的感谢。	
It gives me great pleasure to meet you again in Antalya. First of all, I would like to thank President Erdogan and the Turkish side for the warm hospitality.
土耳其是古代东西方文明交汇之地。今天二十国集团领导人在这里齐聚一堂，共商世界经济发展合作大计，很有意义。二十国集团的任务是促进世界经济增长。当前形势下，亟需我们回答两个问题。一是“怎么看”，要精准把脉世界经济形势。二是“怎么办”，要为促进全球经济增长和就业开出良方。	
Turkey is the meeting place of the ancient Eastern and Western civilizations. Today, leaders of the G20 are gathering here to discuss important issues concerning world economic development and cooperation. Such discussion cannot be more relevant. The G20 is tasked to promote global growth. Under the current circumstances, we must answer two questions. The first is how to make an accurate assessment of the health of world economy. The second is what are the right prescriptions for boosting global growth and employment.
一个基本判断是，国际金融危机深层次影响还在继续，世界经济仍然处在深度调整期。回顾上世纪几次大的全球性经济危机，各国应对手段的失误通常使经济难以复苏。这次国际金融危机发生以来，各国分别采取一些财政货币措施，一定程度上起到了稳定市场和扭转颓势的作用。现在看来，这次国际金融危机复杂程度远超以往，解决起来需要综合施策，绝非一日之功。这就是为什么国际金融危机发生已经7年，世界经济恢复仍然缓慢、增长仍然脆弱的原因。	
Our basic observation is that the profound impacts of the international financial crisis are lingering, and the world economy is still in a period of deep adjustment. A review of the major global economic crises in the 20th century shows that flawed responses from countries would often make economic recovery more difficult. During the crisis this time, the countries concerned have adopted various fiscal and monetary measures, which have, to a certain extent, stabilized the market and reversed the downward trend. However, as things stand now, the current crisis is far more complex than any of the previous crises, and it cannot be fixed overnight. A multi-pronged approach is therefore required to overcome the crisis. This explains why seven years into the crisis, the world economy is still slow in recovery and weak in growth.
中国古代先贤说：“善治病者，必医其受病之处；善救弊者，必塞其起弊之原。”究其根本，世界经济发展到今天，上一轮科技和产业革命所提供的动能已经接近尾声，传统经济体制和发展模式的潜能趋于消退。同时，发展不平衡问题远未解决，现有经济治理机制和架构的缺陷逐渐显现。这些因素导致世界经济整体动力不足，有效需求不振。其表象是增长乏力、失业率上升、债务高企、贸易和投资低迷、实体经济失速、金融杠杆率居高不下、国际金融和大宗商品市场波动等一系列问题。这就像一个人生了病，看起来是感冒发烧，但根子在身体机理出了问题。	
As an old Chinese saying goes, "To cure a disease, one should treat its root causes; to fix a problem, one should target its source." Taking a closer look at today's world economy, we can see that the momentum generated by the last round of scientific and industrial revolution is waning and the potential for growth under the traditional economic system and model of development is diminishing. At the same time, the problem of uneven development is far from being resolved, and the inadequacies of the existing economic governance mechanism and structure have become more evident. These factors have weakened the momentum of global growth and dampened effective demand, which are manifested in sluggish growth, rising unemployment, soaring debt level, slump in trade and investment, deceleration of the real economy, excess leverage in the financial sector and turbulence in the international financial and commodities markets. Like a person who falls ill, running a fever may just be the symptoms, the root cause, however, lies with problems in the body system.
找准了病灶，就要对症下药。作为国际经济合作主要论坛，二十国集团要确定目标、指明方向、发挥领导力。我们既要治标以求眼下稳增长，又要治本以谋长远添动力；既要落实好以往成果，又要凝聚新的共识；既要采取国内措施、做好自己的事，又要精诚合作、共同应对挑战。为此，我愿提出以下建议。	
Once the root cause is located, targeted medicine must be prescribed. As the premier forum for international economic cooperation, the G20 should identify its goal, set the direction and exercise leadership. We should not only address the immediate challenge by stabilizing growth, but also tackle the root cause by gathering momentum for long-term development. We should implement the outcomes of previous summits and strive to forge new consensus. We should manage our own affairs well by taking effective measures at home, and respond to the challenges together through closer cooperation. In this connection, I wish to make the following proposals.
第一，加强宏观经济政策沟通和协调，形成政策和行动合力。“孤举者难起，众行者易趋。”近年来世界经济增长的历程一再表明，在经济全球化时代，没有哪一个国家可以独善其身，协调合作是我们的必然选择。二十国集团成员块头大，占全球经济总量80%以上，对世界经济增长的责任也就更大，理应也能够有所作为。	
First, strengthen macroeconomic policy communication and coordination, and form synergy between our policies and actions. We have an old Chinese saying, "The going is difficult when doing it alone; the going becomes easier when doing it with many others." The trend of the world economy in recent years shows that in the age of economic globalization, no country can prosper in isolation. Coordination and cooperation is the only viable choice. Members of the G20 are all major economies. Together, we represent over 80% of the global economy, and naturally carry greater responsibilities for global growth. Therefore, we must and, in fact, can be more proactive in our actions.
我们应该根据各自国情采取必要的财政和货币政策，促进全球经济增长，维护国际市场稳定。主要发达经济体要努力巩固和扩大复苏势头。新兴市场国家和发展中国家则要努力克服下行风险和压力，保持和恢复增长。在这一过程中，各方应该特别注意加强彼此政策的沟通和协调，防止负面外溢效应。在世界经济中举足轻重的大国，则更需要在制定宏观经济政策时充分考虑对他国的影响，提高透明度。中国将继续作出自己的努力。	
We should take necessary fiscal and monetary policies in line with our respective national conditions to drive global growth and maintain market stability in the world. Major developed economies should consolidate and strengthen the momentum of recovery, while emerging markets and developing countries should overcome downward risks and pressure to keep growth on track. In this process, the parties should pay particular attention to the communication and coordination of their respective policies in order to avoid negative spillovers. For major countries who carry significant weight in the world economy, it is all the more necessary for them to take into full consideration the impact of their macroeconomic policies on others and increase the transparency of their policy-making process. China will continue to make its own efforts toward this end.
第二，推动改革创新，增强世界经济中长期增长潜力。世界经济长远发展的动力源自创新。总结历史经验，我们会发现，体制机制变革释放出的活力和创造力，科技进步造就的新产业和新产品，是历次重大危机后世界经济走出困境、实现复苏的根本。	
Second, promote reform and innovation, and boost the medium- and long-term growth potential of the world economy. Innovation provides the driving force for long-term global growth. A review of historical experience shows that the dynamism and creativity unleashed through institutional reform and the new industries and products enabled by the advances in science and technology have been essential for the world economy to turn the corner and recover from previous major crises.
无论是在国内同中国企业家交流，还是访问不同国家，我都有一个强烈感受，那就是新一轮科技和产业革命正在创造历史性机遇，催生互联网＋、分享经济、3D打印、智能制造等新理念、新业态，其中蕴含着巨大商机，正在创造巨大需求，用新技术改造传统产业的潜力也是巨大的。我们应该抓住机遇，把推动创新驱动和打造新增长源作为二十国集团新的合作重点，重视供给端和需求端协同发力，加快新旧增长动力转换，共同创造新的有效和可持续的全球需求，引领世界经济发展方向。	
One strong impression I have got from meetings with Chinese entrepreneurs back at home and during my visits to foreign countries is that the new round of scientific and industrial revolution is creating historic opportunities. New ideas and new business forms such as Internet+, sharing economy, 3D printing and smart manufacturing are generating enormous business opportunities and demand. There is also huge potential in upgrading traditional industries with new technologies. We should seize the opportunities, and make innovation-driven development and cultivation of new growth points the new priorities of G20 cooperation. We should make greater efforts on both supply and demand sides, accelerate the transition from old to new drivers of growth, work together to create new, effective and sustainable global demand, and set the direction for world economic growth.
第三，构建开放型世界经济，激发国际贸易和投资活力。国际贸易增速连续3年低于世界经济增速，2014年全球外国直接投资下降8%。这值得我们高度关注。我们把世界经济比作人的肌体，那么贸易和投资就是血液。如果气滞血瘀，难畅其流，世界经济就无法健康发展。	
Third, build an open world economy and reinvigorate international trade and investment. Growth in international trade has been slower than that of the world economy for three consecutive years. In 2014, foreign direct investment around the world dropped by 8%. This is something that deserves close attention. If the world economy could be compared to a human body, trade and investment is like its blood. If the blood vessels are blocked, the health of the world economy would be at risk.
因此，重振贸易和投资，让世界经济这两大引擎重新高速转动起来，是二十国集团工作的另一个重点。要反对保护主义，维护和加强多边贸易体制，为不同国家发展提供充足空间。我们应该确保区域自由贸易安排对多边贸易体制形成有益补充，而不是造成新的障碍或藩篱。我们应该推动世界贸易组织第十届部长级会议取得平衡、有意义、符合发展内涵的成果，早日实现发展回合目标。	
Therefore, revitalizing trade and investment and restoring these two engines of the world economy to high-speed operation is another priority for the G20. We should reject protectionism and uphold and strengthen the multilateral trading regime in order to provide sufficient space for the development of different countries. We should ensure that regional free trade arrangements serve as a useful complement to multilateral trading regime, rather than create new obstacles or barriers. We should work for balanced, meaningful and development-oriented outcomes of the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference and endeavor to realize the goal of the development round as early as possible.
第四，落实2030年可持续发展议程，为公平包容发展注入强劲动力。消除贫困和饥饿，实现公平、开放、全面、创新发展，不仅是共同的道义责任，而且能释放出不可估量的有效需求。今年9月，我同在座的许多同事一道在联合国发展峰会上核准了2030年可持续发展议程。二十国集团集中了当今世界大部分主要经济体，完全应该也有能力在落实方面先行一步，作出表率。	
Fourth, implement the 2030 sustainable development agenda and lend strong impetus to equitable and inclusive development. To eliminate poverty and hunger and achieve equitable, open, all-round and innovation-driven development, this is not only our shared moral responsibility, but will also unlock immeasurable effective demand. At the UN Sustainable Development Summit last September, together with many of the leaders in this room, we adopted the 2030 sustainable development agenda. As most of the world's major economies are represented in the G20, it has every reason and ability to set a good example by being the first to implement the agenda.
中国将致力于在未来5年使中国7000多万农村贫困人口全部脱贫，将设立“南南合作援助基金”，并将继续增加对最不发达国家投资，支持发展中国家落实2030年可持续发展议程。中国将把落实2030年可持续发展议程纳入“十三五”规划，我倡议二十国集团成员都制定落实这一议程的国别方案，汇总形成二十国集团整体行动计划，助推世界经济强劲、可持续、平衡增长。	
China is committed to lifting over 70 million people in rural areas out of poverty in the next five years. We will set up a fund for South-South cooperation and increase investment in the least developed countries and support developing countries in their efforts to implement the 2030 agenda. China will make implementation of the 2030 agenda part of its 13th Five-Year Plan. I suggest all the G20 members come up with their own national plans of implementation which will be combined to form a G20 plan of action to boost strong, sustainable and balanced global growth.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
近段时间，大家都很关心中国经济。这完全可以理解，因为中国已经成为全球第二大经济体，同各国经济紧密相连。在这里，我想强调的是，中国有信心、有能力保持经济中高速增长，继续为各国发展创造机遇。中国在世界经济最困难的时刻，承担了拉动增长的重任。2009年到2011年间，中国对世界经济增长的贡献率达到50%以上。目前，中国经济增速虽有所放缓，对世界经济增长的贡献率仍在30%以上，仍是世界经济重要动力源。
I know that you have been following China's economy closely in recent period. This is fully understandable, for China is already the second largest economy and closely interconnected with other economies. Here I want to make it clear that we have the confidence and ability to sustain a medium high growth rate and continue to create development opportunities for other countries. At the most difficult time for the world economy, China undertook the task to drive growth. Between 2009 and 2011, China's contribution to the global economic growth stayed above 50%. Today, the Chinese economy, though slowing down to some extent, still contributes to over 30% of the global growth and remains a major driving force for the global economy.
——我们的信心，来自于全面深化改革、建立开放型经济新体制的决心和行动。经过30多年快速发展，中国经济已经到了转方式、调结构的关键阶段。在全球经济疲弱的背景下，中国也难免受到影响。面对下行压力，我们可以出台大规模刺激措施，短期内完全能够实现更高速度的增长，我们有这个能力。之所以没有这样做，是因为高消耗、高投入的模式对中国而言难以持续，也会给世界经济带来风险。因此，我们强调坚持进行结构性改革，着力解决经济中的深层次和中长期问题，让中国经济走得更好更稳更远。转方式、调结构不会一帆风顺，不可能一蹴而就，必然会遇到困难和阻力，但中国推进结构性改革的决心是坚定的，扩大开放的方针是明确的，不会有丝毫动摇。	
-- Such confidence is underpinned by our resolve and action to deepen reform in a comprehensive way and develop an open economy. After 30-plus years of fast growth, we have come to a critical point when we must adjust the growth pattern and structure of the Chinese economy. We are not immune from the impacts of the sluggish global economy. In the face of the downward pressure, we could have resorted to massive stimulus measures that would spur faster growth in the short term. We do have the ability to do so, but we have chosen not to do so, because the growth fueled by huge input of resources and investment will be unsustainable for China and put the world economy at risk. That is why we underscore the need for structural reform to tackle the deep-seated and medium- to long-term problems in the economy to secure more efficient, solid and sustained growth. This endeavor won't be a smooth sailing. It won't happen overnight. It will inevitably encounter difficulties and resistance. But our resolve to push forward structural reform is rock-firm and our policy to open up further is clear. There will be no change in our commitment.
——我们的信心，来自于中国经济强劲内生动力和中国政府坚强有力的政策引导。今年前三季度，在中国经济发展中，消费对经济增长的贡献率近60%，服务业比重超过50%，高技术产业增速明显快于整体工业，新的增长动力正在加快形成。今年中国经济预计实现7%左右增长，其增量相当于一个中等国家全年的国内生产总值，比前几年两位数增长时还要多。我们已经出台“十三五”规划建议，致力于到2020年全面建成小康社会，国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入比2010年翻一番。未来5年，中国将按照创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，着力实施创新驱动发展战略，增强经济发展新动力，坚持新型工业化、信息化、城镇化、农业现代化同步发展；加快制造大国向制造强国转变，推动移动互联网、云计算、大数据等技术创新和应用；坚持绿色低碳发展，改善环境质量，建设天蓝、地绿、水清的美丽中国；坚持深度融入全球经济，落实“一带一路”倡议，以服务业为重点放宽外资准入领域，探索推行准入前国民待遇加负面清单的外资管理模式，营造高标准国际营商环境，打造利益共同体；坚持全面保障和改善民生，构建公平公正、共建共享的包容性发展新机制，使发展成果更多更公平惠及全体人民。所有这些，将为中国经济增长提供强大动力，也为世界经济释放出巨大需求，成为新的增长源。	
-- Such confidence is supported by the strong dynamism within China's economy and the effective policy guidance from the Chinese government. In the first three quarters of this year, consumption and services contributed to almost 60% and over 50% of China's economic growth respectively. Hi-tech sector is growing notably faster than industrial growth in general. And new drivers of growth are quickly emerging. For the year of 2015, China's economy is expected to grow at around 7%, with an increment equivalent to the GDP of a medium-sized country and larger than the increment created by the double-digit growth several years ago. We have adopted the proposal on the 13th Five-Year Plan, committing to the attainment of a society of initial prosperity in all respects and the doubling of the 2010 GDP and per capita urban and rural income by 2020. In the coming five years, we will pursue innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, focus on implementing the strategy of innovation-driven growth, create new driving force and ensure balanced progress in promoting a new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization. We will move from being a big manufacturer to a strong manufacturer and boost technological innovations and their application including mobile internet, cloud computing and big data. We will pursue green and low-carbon development to improve the environment and ensure that our people live in a beautiful China with clean air, green eco-system and clear water. We will integrate the Chinese economy more closely with the global economy, implement the "Belt and Road" Initiative, give foreign investment greater market access, particularly in the service sector, explore a model of foreign investment regulation based on pre-establishment national treatment plus negative list, foster a high-standard international business environment and build a community of shared interests. We will also ensure people's well-being and improve their living standards across the board, put in place new institutions for equitable, fair and inclusive development made possible and shared by the people, so that more fruits of development will be shared by all in a more equitable fashion. All these efforts, as they unfold, will give strong momentum to the Chinese economy while generating enormous demand and becoming a new source of growth for the world economy.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
与其坐而论道，不如起而行之。让我们继续发扬同舟共济的伙伴精神，通过我们的行动，努力形成各国增长相互促进、相得益彰的合作共赢格局，开创世界经济更加美好的未来！
Instead of talking the talk, we must walk the walk. As passengers of the same boat, let us continue to forge ahead in the spirit of partnership, make concerted efforts to secure win-win cooperation with mutually reinforcing growth of our economies, and open up a bright future of the world economy.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
116. 习近平在亚非领导人会议上的讲话
弘扬万隆精神 推进合作共赢
——在亚非领导人会议上的讲话
（2015年4月22日，雅加达）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Carry Forward the Bandung Spirit for Win-win Cooperation
Remarks by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the Asian-African Summit
Jakarta, 22 April 2015
尊敬的佐科总统，
尊敬的各位同事，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
President Joko Widodo,
Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
今天，亚非国家领导人汇聚在美丽的雅加达，共同纪念万隆会议召开60周年，共商亚非友好合作和发展振兴大计，具有十分重要的意义。首先，我谨向佐科总统和印度尼西亚政府，表示衷心的感谢！向大家转达中国人民的诚挚问候和良好祝愿！	
Today, we, the leaders of Asian and African countries, are gathered here in this beautiful city of Jakarta to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the Bandung Conference, and to discuss important issues bearing on friendship and cooperation between Asia and Africa as well as development and rejuvenation in our respective countries. To me, this is a conference of far-reaching significance. First of all, I wish to express my heartfelt thanks to President Joko Widodo and the Indonesian government and to convey to you the sincere greetings and best wishes of the Chinese people.
60年前，亚非29个国家和地区领导人出席了万隆会议，形成了团结、友谊、合作的万隆精神，促进了亚非拉民族解放运动，加速了全球殖民体系瓦解的历史进程。会议在和平共处五项原则基础上，提出处理国家间关系的十项原则，为推动国际关系朝着正确方向发展，为推动亚非合作、南南合作，为促进南北合作，发挥了重大历史性作用。因此，万隆会议是亚非人民团结合作的一个里程碑。	
Sixty years ago, leaders from 29 Asian and African countries attended the Bandung Conference, giving birth to the Bandung Spirit of solidarity, friendship and cooperation, galvanizing the national liberation movement that swept across Asia, Africa and Latin America, and accelerating the global process of decolonization. On the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence, the Conference put forth the ten principles for the handling of state-to-state relations, which played a historic role in charting the right course for international relations, advancing Asia-Africa and South-South cooperation, and promoting North-South cooperation. The Bandung Conference, indeed, stands as a major milestone for the solidarity and cooperation between Asian and African peoples.
60年来，亚非这两片古老大陆发生了广泛而深刻的变化。亚非各国人民掌握了自己命运，相继赢得了政治独立，坚定致力于经济社会发展，推动亚非两大洲从过去贫穷落后的地区成为具有巨大发展活力的地区。在万隆精神激励下，亚非国家联合自强，区域、次区域、跨区域合作方兴未艾，在地区和国际事务中发挥着越来越重要的作用，在世界战略全局中的地位不断上升。	
Over the past sixty years, sweeping and profound changes have taken place in the two ancient continents of Asia and Africa. Having won political independence as masters of their own destinies, the people of Asian and African countries have worked steadfastly to promote economic and social development, and endeavored to turn the once impoverished and backward continents into lands brimming with vigor and vitality for development. Inspired by the Bandung Spirit, Asian and African countries have enhanced their strength through unity and made steady progress in their cooperation at regional, sub-regional and cross-regional levels. By playing an increasingly important role in regional and international affairs, the stature of the Asian and African countries in the world strategic landscape has been elevated steadily.
60年后的今天，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流更加强劲，各国越来越成为你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体。同时，应该看到，世界还很不太平，局部动荡此起彼伏，恐怖主义、重大传染性疾病等全球性问题不断增多，南北差距依然悬殊，亚非国家的主权安全、团结合作、共同发展依然面临不少困难和挑战。	
Today, sixty years later, with the trend of the times featuring peace, development and win-win cooperation picking up steam, countries have evolved to forge a community of common destiny with each having a stake in others. At the same time, no one should lose sight of the fact that the world is by no means a tranquil place. Local turbulences keep cropping up, and such global challenges as terrorism and major communicable diseases are on constant increase. North-South gap remains staggering. Asian and African countries still face multiple difficulties and challenges in upholding sovereignty and security, maintaining unity and cooperation and achieving common development.
新形势下，万隆精神仍然具有强大生命力。我们要大力弘扬万隆精神，不断赋予其新的时代内涵，推动构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，推动国际秩序和国际体系朝着更加公正合理的方向发展，推动建设人类命运共同体，更好造福亚非人民及其他地区人民。为此，我愿提出如下倡议。	
The Bandung Spirit under the new circumstances retains strong vitality. We must carry forward the Bandung Spirit by enriching it with new elements consistent with changing times, by pushing for a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation, by promoting a more just and equitable international order and system, and by building a community of common destiny for whole humanity so as to bring about even greater benefits to the people in Asia, Africa and other parts of the world. To this end, I wish to make the following proposals:
第一，深化亚非合作。亚非两大洲都是人类文明的重要发源地，人口总量占世界的四分之三，国家数量超过联合国会员国的一半，亚非合作具有越来越重要的全球意义。面对新机遇新挑战，亚非国家要坚持安危与共、守望相助，把握机遇、共迎挑战，提高亚非合作水平，继续做休戚与共、同甘共苦的好朋友、好伙伴、好兄弟。	
First, we should deepen Asian-African cooperation. As important cradles of human civilization, the two continents are home to three quarters of the world population, and boast more than half of the UN member states. Asian-African cooperation is acquiring a global dimension of growing importance. In the face of new opportunities and new challenges, Asian and African countries need to hold on to their tradition of sharing weal and woe, seize the opportunities and meet the challenges together, and push Asian-African cooperation constantly to a higher level, so that we will always stay as good friends, good partners and good brothers.
非洲有句谚语，“一根原木盖不起一幢房屋”。中国也有句古话，“孤举者难起，众行者易趋”。亚非国家加强互利合作，能产生“一加一大于二”的积极效应。我们要坚持互利共赢、共同发展，对接发展战略，加强基础设施互联互通，推进工业、农业、人力资源开发等各领域务实合作，打造绿色能源、环保、电子商务等合作新亮点，把亚非经济互补性转化为发展互助力。要深化区域和跨区域合作，用好现有区域和次区域合作机制，适时建立新的合作平台，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，构建宽领域、多层次、全方位的亚非合作新格局。	
As an African proverb goes, "One single pillar is not sufficient to build a house." In China, we have an old saying, which reads, "The going is difficult when doing it alone; the going is made easier when doing it with many others." By working closely together, Asian and African countries will gain far more than what their combined strengths could produce. We need to follow a win-win approach for common development, align our development strategies, enhance infrastructure connectivity, promote result-oriented cooperation in industry, agriculture, human resources development and other fields, and cultivate such new bright spots of cooperation as green energy, environment and e-commerce so as to translate the economic complementarity of the two continents into a collective driving force for their development. We should deepen regional and sub-regional cooperation, make better use of the existing mechanisms, build new cooperation platforms when conditions allow to advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and promote a new architecture of wide-ranging, multi-levelled and all-dimensional Asian-African cooperation.
亚非地区有100多个国家，社会制度、历史文化、价值观念千差万别，共同构成异彩纷呈的文明画卷。我们要坚持求同存异、开放包容，在交流互鉴中取长补短，在求同存异中共同前进，让各个文明都绽放出自己的光彩。亚非合作不是封闭的、排他的，而是开放的、共赢的，我们欢迎其他地区国家积极参与并作出建设性贡献。	
There are more than 100 countries in Asia and Africa. Though diverse in social system, history, culture and values, they present a colorful tapestry of civilizations. We should seek common ground while shelving differences, and be open and inclusive. By drawing on each other's strengths through exchanges and mutual learning, we may see all civilizations progress and thrive together. What is more, Asian-African cooperation is not a closed and exclusive pursuit, but an open and win-win endeavor. We therefore welcome active participation and constructive contribution by countries from other regions.
第二，拓展南南合作。当年，中国改革开放的总设计师邓小平先生说，南南合作这个提法很好，应该给发明者一枚勋章。广大发展中国家都面临着加快发展、改善民生的共同使命，应该抱团取暖、扶携前行，积极开展各领域合作，实现我们各自的发展蓝图。搞好亚非合作，对南南合作具有重要示范带动作用。	
Second, we should expand South-South cooperation. Mr. Deng Xiaoping, the chief architect of China's reform and opening-up, once said that South-South cooperation was such a well-put term that we must give whoever invented it a big medal. Indeed, developing countries in their large numbers are all faced with the common mission of accelerating development and improving people's lives. They ought to look to one another for comfort and come to each other's aid in times of difficulty. And they should actively carry out cooperation across the board to realize their respective development blueprints. A successful Asian-African cooperation will set a good and important example for South-South cooperation in other parts of the world.
亚非国家要深化合作，同时要加强同拉美、南太及其他地区发展中国家的团结合作，扩大在治国理政方面的对话交流，密切在重大国际和地区问题上的沟通和协调，壮大维护世界和平、促进共同发展的力量。	
While deepening their cooperation, Asian and African countries should step up unity and cooperation with the developing countries in Latin America, South Pacific and other regions, including in such areas as dialogue and exchange on governance, communication and coordination on major international and regional issues, and enhancement of forces making for world peace and common development.
加强南南合作，需要加强机制建设。要发挥好不结盟运动、七十七国集团等机制的作用，建设好亚洲相互协作与信任措施会议、金砖国家等合作平台，推动发展中国家区域组织开展对话交流，探讨建立南南合作新架构。中方支持印尼方建立亚非中心的倡议。要提高发展中国家在国际体系内的代表性和发言权，引导2015年后发展议程谈判重点关注解决发展中国家、特别是非洲国家和最不发达国家面临的困难和挑战，更好维护发展中国家正当权益。	
Enhanced South-South cooperation calls for more effective institutions and mechanisms. It is important to make good use of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Group of 77 and other groupings, strengthen cooperation platforms such as the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) and BRICS, encourage dialogue and exchanges among regional organizations of developing countries and explore new frameworks for South-South cooperation. In this connection, China supports Indonesia's initiative of establishing an Asia-Africa Center. It is necessary to increase the representation and voice of the developing countries in the various international systems, guide the negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda so that they will focus more on addressing the difficulties and challenges of the developing countries, especially African countries and the least developed countries, and safeguard more effectively the legitimate rights and interests of the developing countries.
第三，推进南北合作。万隆精神不仅适用于亚非合作、南南合作，对促进南北合作也具有重要启示和借鉴意义。实现世界均衡发展，不可能建立在一批国家越来越富裕、另一批国家长期贫穷落后的基础之上。从建设人类命运共同体的战略高度看，南北关系不仅是一个经济发展问题，而且是一个事关世界和平稳定的全局性问题。	
Third, we should advance North-South cooperation. The Bandung Spirit is not only relevant to Asian-African cooperation and South-South cooperation, it also provides important inspiration and useful reference for greater North-South cooperation. Balanced global development will remain elusive if a group of countries is allowed to get richer and richer while another group gets trapped in prolonged poverty and backwardness. From the strategic perspective of building a community of common destiny for mankind, North-South relations are not merely an economic and development issue but one that bears on the whole picture of world peace and stability.
坚持相互尊重、平等相待，是开展南北合作的政治基础。合作共赢的基础是平等，离开了平等难以实现合作共赢。国家不分大小、强弱、贫富，都是国际社会平等成员，都有平等参与地区和国际事务的权利。要尊重各国主权、独立、领土完整，尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，反对干涉别国内政，反对把自己的意志强加于人。	
Mutual respect and equality in state-to-state relations forms the political foundation in North-South cooperation. The win-win cooperation must be based on equality without which there would be no win-win cooperation. All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, are all equal members of the international community entitled to equal participation in relevant regional and international affairs. It is necessary to respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of all countries, respect their independent choices of social system and development path, oppose any interference in the internal affairs of other countries and reject the behavior to impose one's will on others.
帮助发展中国家发展、缩小南北差距，是发达国家应该承担的责任和义务。要推动发达国家切实履行官方发展援助承诺，在不附带政治条件基础上，加大对发展中国家支持力度，增强发展中国家自主发展能力，建立更加平等均衡的新型全球发展伙伴关系。要维护和发展开放型世界经济，推动建设公平公正、包容有序的国际经济金融体系，为发展中国家发展营造良好外部环境。	
Helping developing countries to achieve development so as to close the North-South gap is the bounden responsibility and obligation of the developed countries. It is important to prod developed countries to earnestly deliver on their ODA commitments, step up their support for developing countries with no political strings attached, and build a more fair and balanced new global development partnership by strengthening the developing countries' capacity for independent development. It is also important to uphold and promote an open world economy, build fair, equitable, inclusive and rules-based international economic and financial systems, and create a sound external environment favorable for the development of developing countries.
要摒弃冷战思维、零和博弈的旧观念，倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续安全的新理念，坚持通过对话协商和平解决分歧争端，共同应对恐怖主义、公共卫生、网络安全、气候变化等非传统安全问题和全球性挑战，建设命运共同体，走出一条共建、共享、共赢的安全新路，共同维护地区和世界和平稳定。	
It is necessary to abandon such outdated thinking as Cold War mentality and zero-sum game, champion the new vision for common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and settle conflicts and disputes peacefully through dialogue and consultation. Concerted efforts should be made to address non-traditional security issues and meet global challenges such as terrorism, public health hazards, cyber security and climate change, so as to build a community of common destiny, find a new path featuring security by all, of all and for all, and work together for lasting peace and stability in regions and around the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
中国是亚非团结合作的积极倡导者和推动者，始终坚定支持亚非国家争取民族解放的正义事业，坚定促进亚非国家共同发展，并向亚非国家提供了真诚无私的援助。中国在维护国家主权、推进国家统一、实现国家发展的进程中，也得到了亚非国家的宝贵支持和帮助。中国人民对此永远不会忘记。	
As a champion and staunch advocate for Asian-African solidarity and cooperation, China has given its firm and persistent support to the just cause of Asian and African countries for national liberation, acted resolutely to promote the common development of Asian and African countries, and provided them with sincere and selfless assistance. China, in its efforts to safeguard sovereignty, promote reunification and build the nation, has also received valuable support and help from Asian and African countries. The Chinese people will never forget that.
新形势下，中国将坚定不移推进亚非合作。中国已经同周边8个国家签署睦邻友好合作条约，愿同所有周边国家商签睦邻友好合作条约，将加强同非洲国家和平安全合作，帮助非方增强维和、反恐、打击海盗等方面能力。中国愿同亚非国家开展产能合作，支持非洲国家建设高速铁路、高速公路、区域航空网络，推动亚非工业化进程。中国将于年内对已建交的最不发达国家97%税目产品给予零关税待遇，并将继续向发展中国家提供不附加任何政治条件的援助。中国愿同有关各方一道推进“一带一路”建设，共同建设好亚洲基础设施投资银行，发挥好丝路基金作用。中国将同有关国家一道，完善中国－东盟、中阿合作论坛、上海合作组织等合作平台，办好年内在南非召开的中非合作论坛第六届部长级会议。中国将继续推动南南合作及南北合作，共同维护地区和世界和平稳定，促进共同发展繁荣。	
Under the new circumstances, China will stay firmly committed to closer Asian-African cooperation. Having already signed with eight of its neighbors the treaty of good-neighborliness, friendship and cooperation, China is ready to do the same with the rest of its neighboring countries. China will step up peace and security cooperation with African countries with a view to enhancing their capacity for peacekeeping, counter-terrorism, and counter-piracy operations. China is ready to carry out production capacity cooperation with Asian and African countries, helping African countries with the building of high-speed rail, expressway and regional aviation networks and facilitating the industrialization process in Asia and Africa. By the end of this year, China will extend zero-tariff treatment to 97% of tax items from all the least developed countries having diplomatic ties with China. And China will continue to provide assistance to developing countries without political conditions. China will work with all parties in the building of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, managing well the launch of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) and making proper use of the Silk Road Fund. China will join the relevant countries in improving ASEAN Plus China, the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and other cooperation platforms, and ensuring the success of the 6th Ministerial Conference of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation to be held in South Africa later this year. China will continue to promote South-South cooperation and North-South cooperation, working with other countries to secure peace and stability at regional and global levels and achieve common development and prosperity.
我愿在这里宣布：中国未来5年内将向亚非发展中国家提供10万名培训名额；连续在华举办亚非青年联欢节，共邀请2000名亚非青年来华访问并参加联欢；将成立中国－亚非合作中心，进一步推进亚非各国交流合作；设立中国－亚非法协国际法交流与研究项目；年内还将举办以弘扬万隆精神为主题的国际研讨会，欢迎各方积极参与。	
I would like to announce here that in the next five years, China will offer 100,000 training opportunities for candidates from developing countries in Asia and Africa and host the annual Asia-Africa Youth Festival, inviting a total of 2,000 Asian and African youth to China. China will set up a China-Asia and Africa cooperation center to further exchanges and cooperation among Asian and African countries. China will launch a program for exchanges and research on international law between China and the Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization. And China will host an international seminar this year themed on the Bandung Spirit. Your active participation in the event will be greatly appreciated.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
当前，中国人民正在按照全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党的战略布局，齐心协力实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦。中国梦同亚非人民及其他各国人民的美好梦想息息相通，不仅造福中国人民，而且造福各国人民。	
Guided by the strategic vision of completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and comprehensively deepening reform, advancing law-based governance, and enforcing strict Party discipline, the Chinese people are working in concert to achieve the two centenary goals (completing the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects when the Communist Party of China celebrates its centenary in 2021 and having a prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious country when the People's Republic celebrates its centenary in 2049) and realize the Chinese dream of great national rejuvenation. The Chinese dream, which is highly compatible with the dreams of other people in Asia, Africa and beyond, will bring benefit not only to the Chinese people but also to the people all over the world.
中华民族是一个爱好和平的民族，历来崇尚“和为贵”。中国将坚持走和平发展道路，坚持独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持奉行互利共赢的开放战略，坚持正确义利观，在和平共处五项原则基础上发展同各国的友好合作，始终做维护世界和平、促进共同发展的坚定力量。无论发展到哪一步，无论国际风云如何变幻，中国都永远做发展中国家的可靠朋友和真诚伙伴。这是中国对外政策的基础，过去、现在、将来都不会改变。	
The Chinese nation is one that loves peace, cherishes peace and advocates peace. Committing itself to the path of peaceful development, China will continue to pursue an independent foreign policy of peace, an opening-up strategy of mutual benefit, and a balanced approach to principles and interests. Dedicated to developing friendship and cooperation with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence, China will always be a staunch force for world peace and common development. No matter how developed it may become and how much the international landscape may change, China will remain a reliable friend and sincere partner to the developing countries. This bedrock of China's foreign policy has not and will never change.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
按照中国人的说法，每60年是一个纪年循环。亚非合作走过了60个春秋，正来到一个新的起点上。回首过去60年，中国同亚非国家风雨同舟、和衷共济，相互关系就像长江、梭罗河、尼罗河水一样奔流不息。展望未来，我们应该弘扬万隆精神，共同实现亚非振兴梦想，为亚非人民带来更多福祉，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出新的更大的贡献！	
According to the traditional Chinese calendar, every 60 years form a cycle. That brings Asian-African cooperation of 60 years to a new starting point. The past six decades saw China and countries in Asia and Africa stand together, rain or shine, with a relationship that flows as vigorous as the mighty Yangtze, Solo and Nile rivers. Looking ahead, we should carry forward the Bandung Spirit and make our dream for rejuvenated Asia and Africa come true. In so doing, we can bring more benefits to our people and contribute more to the lofty cause of peace and development for mankind.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
108. 习近平在全球妇女峰会上的讲话
促进妇女全面发展　共建共享美好世界
——在全球妇女峰会上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
（2015年9月27日，纽约）
Promoting Women's All-round Development and Building a Better World for All
— Speech at the Global Leaders' Meeting on Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
New York, September 27, 2015
尊敬的潘基文秘书长，
尊敬的姆兰博－努卡主任，
尊敬的各位同事，女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Your Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Your Excellency Executive Director Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka,
Dear Colleagues, Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
在联合国成立70周年、北京世界妇女大会召开20周年之际，我们在这里举行全球妇女峰会，为促进男女平等和妇女发展重申承诺、共谋未来，意义重大。	
On the occasion of the 70th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the 20th anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing, it is of great significance for us to convene this Global Leaders' Meeting to reaffirm our commitment to gender equality and women's development and make plans for a better future.
妇女是物质文明和精神文明的创造者，是推动社会发展和进步的重要力量。没有妇女，就没有人类，就没有社会。	
Women are creators of material and spiritual wealth, and represent an important force driving social development and progress. Without women, there would be no continuity of the human race or human society.
追求男女平等的事业是伟大的。纵观历史，没有妇女解放和进步，就没有人类解放和进步。为实现男女平等的崇高理想，人类走过了不平坦、不平凡的历程。从200多年前世界第一份妇女权利宣言诞生，到“三八”国际劳动妇女节的设立，到联合国成立妇女地位委员会，到通过《消除对妇女一切形式歧视公约》，妇女事业发展的每一步都推动了人类文明进步。	
The pursuit of gender equality is a great cause. A review of history shows that without women's liberation and progress, the liberation and progress of mankind would not be attainable. To achieve the lofty goal of gender equality, we have gone through an extraordinary uphill journey. From the publication of the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the Female Citizen over 200 years ago to the observance of International Women's Day on March the Eighth, from the establishment of the UN Commission on the Status of Women to the adoption of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, every step taken to promote the cause of gender equality has been a giant step forward for the progress of human civilization.
20年前，在北京，第四次世界妇女大会通过了《北京宣言》和《行动纲领》，达成促进男女平等、保障妇女权利的战略目标和政策框架。今天，北京世界妇女大会所宣示的精神，在世界催生了积极变化。各国追求男女平等共识日益强化，推动妇女发展行动更趋多样化，妇女生存发展环境不断优化。联合国妇女署做了大量工作，值得充分肯定。	
Twenty years ago, the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing adopted the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action, laying down strategic goals and policy frameworks for promoting gender equality and ensuring women's rights. Today, the spirit championed by the Beijing Conference has catalyzed positive changes worldwide. The consensus among countries on pursuing gender equality is strengthening. A whole range of different actions have been taken to promote women's development. And the social context for women's life-quality and development is improving. In this regard, UN Women should be fully recognized for the tremendous work it has done.
经过持续不断努力，许多以前遥不可及的梦想已经成为现实：全球143个国家通过立法明确规定男女平等，妇女参与政治经济活动在法律上已经没有障碍，妇女接受教育、婚姻自由、职业自由等已经成为社会共识。	
Thanks to determined efforts over the years, dreams that were once beyond reach have come true: 143 countries have enshrined gender equality in their laws, thus removing legal barriers to women's participation in political and economic activities, and there is now a general consensus around the world that women should have access to education and employment, and enjoy freedom of marriage.
同时，环顾世界，各国各地区妇女发展水平仍然不平衡，男女权利、机会、资源分配仍然不平等，社会对妇女潜能、才干、贡献的认识仍然不充分。现在全球8亿贫困人口中，一半以上是妇女。每当战乱和疫病来袭，妇女往往首当其冲。面对恐怖和暴力肆虐，妇女也深受其害。时至今日，针对妇女的各种形式歧视依然存在，虐待甚至摧残妇女的事情时有发生。	
In many parts of the world, however, disparities remain in women's development, and inequality still exists between men and women in rights, opportunities and access to resources. Full recognition of women's potential, talent and contribution has yet to be achieved. Women account for more than half of the 800 million impoverished population of the world. They tend to bear the brunt of wars and epidemics, and they suffer deeply from terrorism and violence. As we speak, various forms of discrimination against women are still taking place. Abuses and inhuman treatment of women continue.
事实表明，实现男女平等，还需要我们付出巨大努力。我们要不懈努力，为妇女事业发展开辟广阔道路。	
All this shows that we still have a long road to travel in achieving gender equality. We must work tirelessly to broaden the prospects for this cause.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
我们刚刚通过2015年后发展议程，性别视角已纳入新发展议程各个领域。让我们发扬北京世界妇女大会精神，重申承诺，为促进男女平等和妇女全面发展加速行动。	
In the Post-2015 Development Agenda we have just adopted, a gender perspective has been included in every item. Let us reaffirm the spirit of the Beijing Conference with renewed commitment and lose no time in promoting gender equality and women's all-round development.
第一，推动妇女和经济社会同步发展。发展离不开妇女，发展要惠及包括妇女在内的全体人民。我们要制定更加科学合理的发展战略，既要考虑各国国情、性别差异、妇女特殊需求，确保妇女平等分享发展成果，又要创新政策手段，激发妇女潜力，推动广大妇女参与经济社会发展。中国实践证明，推动妇女参加社会和经济活动，能有效提高妇女地位，也能极大提升社会生产力和经济活力。	
First, we should fight for women's development in tandem with social and economic progress. Development cannot be achieved without women, and the benefits it brings must be shared by all. We need to come up with better and more-rounded development strategies that take into account national realities, gender differences, and the special needs of women, and aim to ensure women's equal share in the fruits of development. Policy measures should be updated to stimulate women's potential and raise their participation in the process of social and economic development. China's experiences show that a higher level of social and economic participation by women helps to raise their status, and it also boosts social productivity and invigorates the economy.
第二，积极保障妇女权益。妇女权益是基本人权。我们要把保障妇女权益系统纳入法律法规，上升为国家意志，内化为社会行为规范。要增强妇女参与政治经济活动能力，提高妇女参与决策管理水平，使妇女成为政界、商界、学界的领军人物。我们要保障妇女基本医疗卫生服务，特别是要关注农村妇女、残疾妇女、流动妇女、中老年妇女、少数族裔妇女的健康需求。我们要采取措施确保所有女童上得起学和安全上学，发展面向妇女的职业教育和终身教育，帮助她们适应社会和就业市场变化。	
Second, we should protect women's rights and interests. Women's rights and interests are basic human rights. They must be protected by laws and regulations and integrated into national and social rules and norms. We must buttress women's capacity to play their part in society and the economy, enhance women's capability in decision-making and management, and support them in becoming leaders in the fields of politics, business and academia. We must ensure that basic medical services for women are sufficient, and pay particular attention to the health needs of rural women, women with disabilities, migrant women, middle-aged and elderly women, and women of ethnic minorities. We must ensure that school is affordable and safe for every girl, and develop vocational and life-long education for women to help them better adapt to changes in society and the employment market.
第三，努力构建和谐包容的社会文化。男女共有一个世界，消除对妇女的歧视和偏见，将使社会更加包容和更有活力。我们要努力消除一切形式针对妇女的暴力，包括家庭暴力。我们要以男女平等为核心，打破有碍妇女发展的落后观念和陈规旧俗。我赞赏潘基文秘书长发起的“他为她”倡议，希望越来越多男性参与进来。	
Third, we should strive to build harmonious and inclusive societies. Men and women live in the same one world. A society with less discrimination or prejudice against women is often more inclusive and dynamic. We must eradicate all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence. We should focus on gender equality and dismiss outdated mentalities and customs inhibiting women's development. I appreciate Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's "He for She" Initiative, and hope more men will join that action.
第四，创造有利于妇女发展的国际环境。妇女和儿童是一切不和平不安宁因素的最大受害者。我们要坚定和平发展和合作共赢理念，倍加珍惜和平，积极维护和平，让每个妇女和儿童都沐浴在幸福安宁的阳光里。	
Fourth, we should foster a global environment favorable to women's development. Women and children are the ones who suffer most when peace or tranquility is disrupted. We must stand firmly for peace, development and beneficial cooperation, cherish peace dearly and uphold it so that every woman and child will enjoy the sunshine of happiness and tranquility.
各国妇女团体应该加强交流，增进友谊，共同发展，共同进步。要继续开展妇女领域国际发展合作，发达国家要加大对发展中国家的资金和技术援助，缩小各国妇女发展差距。
Women's organizations in different countries should strengthen interactions with each other to enhance friendship, pursue development, and achieve progress together. We should continue to carry out women-related international development cooperation. Developed countries should scale up financial and technological assistance to developing countries and narrow the development gaps among women in different countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
在中国人民追求美好生活的过程中，每一位妇女都有人生出彩和梦想成真的机会。中国将更加积极贯彻男女平等基本国策，发挥妇女“半边天”作用，支持妇女建功立业、实现人生理想和梦想。中国妇女也将通过自身发展不断促进世界妇女运动发展，为全球男女平等事业作出更大贡献。	
As the Chinese people pursue a better life, every Chinese woman has the opportunity to excel in life and make her dreams come true. China will do more to enhance gender equality as its basic state policy, give play to women's important role as "half the sky" and support them in realizing their own dreams and aspirations in both career and life. Women in China, through their own development, will also play a greater part in the global women's movement and make a greater contribution to gender equality throughout the world.
为支持全球妇女事业和联合国妇女署工作，中国将向妇女署捐款1000万美元，用于支持落实《北京宣言》和《行动纲领》，落实2015年后发展议程相关目标。在今后5年内，中国将帮助发展中国家实施100个“妇幼健康工程”，派遣医疗专家小组开展巡医活动；实施100个“快乐校园工程”，向贫困女童提供就学资助，提高女童入学率；邀请3万名发展中国家妇女来华参加培训，并在当地为发展中国家培训10万名女性职业技术人员。在中国同联合国合作设立的有关基金项下，将专门开展支持发展中国家妇女能力建设的项目。	
To support women's development worldwide and the work of UN Women, China will donate US$10 million to UN Women for the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action and the realization of the related goals in the Post-2015 Development Agenda. In the coming five years, China will help other developing countries to build 100 "health projects for women and children," send teams of medical experts to provide services, and implement 100 "happy campus projects" to finance the schooling of poor girls and raise the school enrollment rate for girls. We will also bring 30,000 women from developing countries to attend training programs in China and provide vocational trainings for 100,000 women in other developing countries. Under the related fund co-sponsored by China and the United Nations, there will be special capacity-building programs for women from developing countries.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
让我们携手努力，加速行动，共建共享一个对所有妇女、对所有人更加美好的世界！	
Let us work hand in hand and move faster to build a better world for women and for all!
预祝峰会圆满成功！	
I wish the Global Leaders' Meeting every success.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
100. 习近平在气候变化巴黎大会开幕式上讲话
携手构建合作共赢、公平合理的气候变化治理机制
Work Together to Build a Win-Win, Equitable and Balanced Governance Mechanism on Climate Change
——在气候变化巴黎大会开幕式上的讲话
At the Opening Ceremony of The Paris Conference on Climate Change
（2015年11月30日，巴黎）
Paris, 30 November 2015
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
尊敬的奥朗德总统，
President Hollande,
尊敬的各位同事，
Dear colleagues,
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
今天，我们齐聚巴黎，出席联合国气候变化巴黎大会开幕式。这表明，恐怖主义阻挡不了全人类应对气候变化、追求美好未来的进程。借此机会，我愿向法国人民致以诚挚的慰问，同时对奥朗德总统和法国政府为这次大会召开所作的精心筹备表示感谢。
Today, we are gathering here in Paris for the opening ceremony of the United Nations Conference on Climate Change. Our presence shows that terrorism cannot hold back mankind's efforts to address climate change and pursue a better future. Let me take this opportunity to express my sincere sympathy to the French people and my gratitude to President Hollande and the French government for their meticulous preparations for this conference.
《联合国气候变化框架公约》生效20多年来，在各方共同努力下，全球应对气候变化工作取得积极进展，但仍面临许多困难和挑战。巴黎大会正是为了加强公约实施，达成一个全面、均衡、有力度、有约束力的气候变化协议，提出公平、合理、有效的全球应对气候变化解决方案，探索人类可持续的发展路径和治理模式。法国作家雨果说：“最大的决心会产生最高的智慧。”我相信，只要各方展现诚意、坚定信心、齐心协力，巴黎大会一定能够取得令人满意的成果，不辜负国际社会的热切期盼。
Thanks to joint efforts of all parties since the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change entered into force over 20 years ago, global actions on climate change have made progress although there are still numerous difficulties and challenges. This Paris Conference is hence convened to strengthen implementation of the UNFCCC and bring about a comprehensive, balanced, ambitious and binding agreement on climate change. The conference is also expected to come up with equitable, reasonable and effective global solutions to climate change and explore pathways and governance models for mankind to achieve sustainable development. The French writer Victor Hugo once observed in Les Miserables that "supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions." (Les resources supremes sortent des resolutions extremes.) I believe that with all parties making joint efforts with sincerity and confidence, the Paris Conference will yield satisfying results and meet the high expectations of the international community.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
一份成功的国际协议既要解决当下矛盾，更要引领未来。巴黎协议应该着眼于强化2020年后全球应对气候变化行动，也要为推动全球更好实现可持续发展注入动力。
A successful international agreement should not just address immediate challenges but more importantly, it should also present a vision for the future. The Paris agreement should focus on strengthening post-2020 global actions on climate change and boost global efforts to pursue sustainable development.
——巴黎协议应该有利于实现公约目标，引领绿色发展。协议应该遵循公约原则和规定，推进公约全面有效实施。既要有效控制大气温室气体浓度上升，又要建立利益导向和激励机制，推动各国走向绿色循环低碳发展，实现经济发展和应对气候变化双赢。
- The Paris agreement should help meet the goals of the UNFCCC and chart the course for green development. The agreement should follow the principles and rules set out in the UNFCCC and contribute to its full and effective implementation. The agreement should put effective control on the increase of atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases and set up incentive mechanisms to encourage countries to purse green, circular and low-carbon development featuring both economic growth and an effective response to climate change.
——巴黎协议应该有利于凝聚全球力量，鼓励广泛参与。协议应该在制度安排上促使各国同舟共济、共同努力。除各国政府，还应该调动企业、非政府组织等全社会资源参与国际合作进程，提高公众意识，形成合力。
- The Paris agreement should help galvanize global efforts and encourage broad participation. The agreement should provide institutional arrangements that propel countries to make concerted efforts. Besides governments, it should also mobilize businesses, non-governmental organizations and all players in society to participate in international cooperation on climate change, thus raising public awareness of pooling resources on climate change.
——巴黎协议应该有利于加大投入，强化行动保障。获取资金技术支持、提高应对能力是发展中国家实施应对气候变化行动的前提。发达国家应该落实到2020年每年动员1000亿美元的承诺，2020年后向发展中国家提供更加强有力的资金支持。此外，还应该向发展中国家转让气候友好型技术，帮助其发展绿色经济。
- The Paris agreement should help increase input of resources to ensure actions on climate change. To obtain financial and technical support for capacity building is essential for developing countries to address climate change. Developed countries should honor their commitment of mobilizing US$100 billion each year before 2020 and provide stronger financial support to developing countries afterwards. It is also important that climate-friendly technologies should be transferred to developing countries to help them build green economy.
——巴黎协议应该有利于照顾各国国情，讲求务实有效。应该尊重各国特别是发展中国家在国内政策、能力建设、经济结构方面的差异，不搞一刀切。应对气候变化不应该妨碍发展中国家消除贫困、提高人民生活水平的合理需求。要照顾发展中国家的特殊困难。
- The Paris agreement should accommodate the national conditions of various countries and lay emphasis on practical results. It is imperative to respect differences among countries, especially developing countries, in domestic policies, capacity building and economic structure. A one-size-fits-all approach must be avoided. Addressing climate change should not deny the legitimate needs of developing countries to reduce poverty and improve their people's living Standards. Special needs of the developing countries must be well attended to.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
巴黎协议不是终点，而是新的起点。作为全球治理的一个重要领域，应对气候变化的全球努力是一面镜子，给我们思考和探索未来全球治理模式、推动建设人类命运共同体带来宝贵启示。
The Paris Conference is not the finishing line but a new starting point. As an important part of global governance, the global efforts on climate change can be taken as a mirror for us to reflect on what models to have for future global governance and how to build a community of shared future for mankind. Much valuable inspiration may thus be drawn.
——我们应该创造一个各尽所能、合作共赢的未来。对气候变化等全球性问题，如果抱着功利主义的思维，希望多占点便宜、少承担点责任，最终将是损人不利己。巴黎大会应该摈弃“零和博弈”狭隘思维，推动各国尤其是发达国家多一点共享、多一点担当，实现互惠共赢。
- We should create a future of win-win cooperation, with each country making contribution to the best of its ability. For global issues like climate change, a take-more-give-less approach based on expediency is in nobody's interest. The Paris Conference should reject the narrow-minded mentality of "zero sum game" and call on all countries, the developed countries in particular, to assume more shared responsibilities for win-win outcomes.
——我们应该创造一个奉行法治、公平正义的未来。要提高国际法在全球治理中的地位和作用，确保国际规则有效遵守和实施，坚持民主、平等、正义，建设国际法治。发达国家和发展中国家的历史责任、发展阶段、应对能力都不同，共同但有区别的责任原则不仅没有过时，而且应该得到遵守。
- We should create a future of the rule of law, fairness and justice. It is imperative to enhance the standing and role of international law in global governance, ensure effective observance and implementation of international rules, uphold democracy, equity and justice, and build international rule of law. Given the difference between developed and developing countries in historical responsibility, developing stage and coping capability, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, instead of being obsolete, must continue to be adhered to.
——我们应该创造一个包容互鉴、共同发展的未来。面对全球性挑战，各国应该加强对话，交流学习最佳实践，取长补短，在相互借鉴中实现共同发展，惠及全体人民。同时，要倡导和而不同，允许各国寻找最适合本国国情的应对之策。
- We should create a future of inclusiveness, mutual learning and common development. Facing global challenges, countries need to increase dialogue and exchange best practices. We should draw on each other's strengths to achieve common development through mutual learning, and deliver benefits to all our people. At the same time, we should be prepared to accept harmony without uniformity, allowing individual countries to seek their own solutions that best suit their respective national conditions.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
中国一直是全球应对气候变化事业的积极参与者，有诚意、有决心为巴黎大会成功作出自己的贡献。
China has been actively engaged in the global campaign on climate change. China is both sincere and determined to contribute its share to the success of the Paris Conference.
过去几十年来，中国经济快速发展，人民生活发生了深刻变化，但也承担了资源环境方面的代价。鉴往知来，中国正在大力推进生态文明建设，推动绿色循环低碳发展。中国把应对气候变化融入国家经济社会发展中长期规划，坚持减缓和适应气候变化并重，通过法律、行政、技术、市场等多种手段，全力推进各项工作。中国可再生能源装机容量占全球总量的24%，新增装机占全球增量的42%。中国是世界节能和利用新能源、可再生能源第一大国。
In the past few decades, China has seen rapid economic growth and significant improvement in people's lives. However, this has taken a toll on the environment and resources. Having learned the lesson, China is vigorously making ecological endeavors to promote green, circular and low-carbon growth. We have integrated our climate change efforts into China's medium- and long-term program of economic and social development. We attach equal importance to mitigation and adaption, and try to make progress on all fronts by resorting to legal and administrative means, technologies and market forces. China's installed capacity of renewable energy accounts for 24% of the world's total, with the newly installed capacity accounting for 42% of the global total. China tops the world in terms of energy conservation and utilization of new and renewable energies.
“万物各得其和以生，各得其养以成。”中华文明历来强调天人合一、尊重自然。面向未来，中国将把生态文明建设作为“十三五”规划重要内容，落实创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，通过科技创新和体制机制创新，实施优化产业结构、构建低碳能源体系、发展绿色建筑和低碳交通、建立全国碳排放交易市场等一系列政策措施，形成人和自然和谐发展现代化建设新格局。中国在“国家自主贡献”中提出将于2030年左右使二氧化碳排放达到峰值并争取尽早实现，2030年单位国内生产总值二氧化碳排放比2005年下降60%－65%，非化石能源占一次能源消费比重达到20%左右，森林蓄积量比2005年增加45亿立方米左右。虽然需要付出艰苦的努力，但我们有信心和决心实现我们的承诺。
"All things live in harmony and grow with nourishments." Chinese culture values harmony between man and nature and respects nature. Going forward, ecological endeavors will feature prominently in China's 13th Five-Year Plan. China will work hard to implement the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development. China will, on the basis of technological and institutional innovation, adopt new policy measures to improve industrial mix, build low-carbon energy system, develop green building and low-carbon transportation, and build a nation-wide carbon emission trading market so as to foster a new pattern of modernization featuring harmony between man and nature. In its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions, China pledges to peak CO2 emissions by around 2030 and strive to achieve it as soon as possible, and by 2030, reduce CO2 per unit of GDP by 60-65% over the 2005 level, raise the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to about 20% and increase forest stock by around 4.5 billion cubic meters over 2005. This requires strenuous efforts, but we have confidence and resolve to fulfill our commitments.
中国坚持正确义利观，积极参与气候变化国际合作。多年来，中国政府认真落实气候变化领域南南合作政策承诺，支持发展中国家特别是最不发达国家、内陆发展中国家、小岛屿发展中国家应对气候变化挑战。为加大支持力度，中国在今年9月宣布设立200亿元人民币的中国气候变化南南合作基金。中国将于明年启动在发展中国家开展10个低碳示范区、100个减缓和适应气候变化项目及1000个应对气候变化培训名额的合作项目，继续推进清洁能源、防灾减灾、生态保护、气候适应型农业、低碳智慧型城市建设等领域的国际合作，并帮助他们提高融资能力。
China upholds the values of friendship, justice and shared interests, and takes an active part in international cooperation on climate change. Over the years, the Chinese government has earnestly fulfilled its policy commitments of South-South cooperation regarding climate change to support developing countries, especially the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing states, in confronting the challenge of climate change. In a show of greater support, China announced in September the establishment of an RMB 20 billion South-South Climate Cooperation Fund. Next year, China will launch cooperation projects to set up 10 pilot low-carbon industrial parks and start 100 mitigation and adaptation programs in other developing countries and provide them with 1,000 training opportunities on climate change. China will continue to promote international cooperation in such areas as clean energy, disaster prevention and mitigation, ecological protection, climate-smart agriculture, and low-carbon and smart cities. China will also help other developing countries to increase their financing capacity.
尊敬的各位同事，女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
应对气候变化是人类共同的事业，世界的目光正聚焦于巴黎。让我们携手努力，为推动建立公平有效的全球应对气候变化机制、实现更高水平全球可持续发展、构建合作共赢的国际关系作出贡献！
Tackling climate change is a shared mission for mankind. All eyes are now on Paris. Let us join hands to contribute to the establishment of an equitable and effective global mechanism on climate change, work for global sustainable development at a higher level and bring about new international relations featuring win-win cooperation.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
107. 习近平在第七十届联合国大会一般性辩论时的讲话
携手构建合作共赢新伙伴 同心打造人类命运共同体
——在第七十届联合国大会
一般性辩论时的讲话
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
（2015年9月28日，纽约）
Working Together to Create a New Mutually Beneficial Partnership and Community of Shared Future for Mankind
— Speech at the General Debate of
the 70th Session of the UN General Assembly
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
New York, September 28, 2015
主席先生，各位同事：	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
70年前，我们的先辈经过浴血奋战，取得了世界反法西斯战争的胜利，翻过了人类历史上黑暗的一页。这一胜利来之不易。	
Seventy years ago, an earlier generation fought heroically and secured victory in the World Anti-Fascist War, closing a dark page in the annals of human history. That victory was hard won.
70年前，我们的先辈以远见卓识，建立了联合国这一最具普遍性、代表性、权威性的国际组织，寄托人类新愿景，开启合作新时代。这一创举前所未有。	
Seventy years ago, that generation, with vision and foresight, established the United Nations. This universal and most representative and authoritative international organization has carried mankind's hope for a new future and ushered in a new era of cooperation. This was a pioneering initiative never before undertaken.
70年前，我们的先辈集各方智慧，制定了联合国宪章，奠定了现代国际秩序基石，确立了当代国际关系基本准则。这一成就影响深远。	
Seventy years ago, that generation pooled together their wisdom and adopted the Charter of the United Nations, laying the cornerstones of contemporary international order, and establishing the fundamental principles of contemporary international relations. This was an achievement of profound impact.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
9月3日，中国人民同世界人民一道，隆重纪念了中国人民抗日战争暨世界反法西斯战争胜利70周年。作为东方主战场，中国付出了伤亡3500多万人的民族牺牲，抗击了日本军国主义主要兵力，不仅实现了国家和民族的救亡图存，而且有力支援了在欧洲和太平洋战场上的抵抗力量，为赢得世界反法西斯战争胜利作出了历史性贡献。	
On the third of September, the people of China, together with the rest of humanity, solemnly commemorated the 70th anniversary of victory in the Chinese People's War of Resistance Against Japanese Aggression and the World Anti-Fascist War. As the main theater in the East, China made a national sacrifice of over 35 million casualties in its fight against the main forces of Japanese militarism. It not only saved itself and its people from subjugation, but also gave strong support to the forces combatting aggression in the European and Pacific theaters, thus making a historic contribution to ultimate victory.
历史是一面镜子。以史为鉴，才能避免重蹈覆辙。对历史，我们要心怀敬畏、心怀良知。历史无法改变，但未来可以塑造。铭记历史，不是为了延续仇恨，而是要共同引以为戒。传承历史，不是为了纠结过去，而是要开创未来，让和平的薪火代代相传。	
History is a mirror. Only by drawing lessons from history can the world avoid repeating past calamity. We should view history with awe and through the prism of human conscience. The past cannot be changed, but the future can be shaped. To bear history in mind is not to perpetuate hatred. Rather, its purpose is to ensure that mankind does not forget its lessons. Remembering history does not mean being obsessed with the past. Rather, in doing so, we aim to create a better future and pass the torch of peace from generation to generation.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
联合国走过了70年风风雨雨，见证了各国为守护和平、建设家园、谋求合作的探索和实践。站在新的历史起点上，联合国需要深入思考如何在21世纪更好回答世界和平与发展这一重大课题。	
Over the past seven decades the United Nations has gone through the tests of time. It has witnessed efforts made by all countries to uphold peace, build their own countries, and pursue cooperation. Having reached a new historical starting point, the United Nations needs to address the central issue of how to better promote world peace and development in the 21st century.
世界格局正处在一个加快演变的历史性进程之中。和平、发展、进步的阳光足以穿透战争、贫穷、落后的阴霾。世界多极化进一步发展，新兴市场国家和发展中国家崛起已经成为不可阻挡的历史潮流。经济全球化、社会信息化极大解放和发展了社会生产力，既创造了前所未有的发展机遇，也带来了需要认真对待的新威胁新挑战。	
The world is going through a historical process of accelerated evolution. The light of peace, development and progress will be powerful enough to dispel the clouds of war, poverty and backwardness. The movement toward a multi-polar world and the rise of emerging markets and developing countries has become an irresistible trend of history. Economic globalization and the advent of an information age have unleashed and boosted vast new social productive forces. They have created unprecedented development opportunities while giving rise to new threats and challenges which we must face squarely.
“大道之行也，天下为公。”和平、发展、公平、正义、民主、自由，是全人类的共同价值，也是联合国的崇高目标。目标远未完成，我们仍须努力。当今世界，各国相互依存、休戚与共。我们要继承和弘扬联合国宪章的宗旨和原则，构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，打造人类命运共同体。为此，我们需要作出以下努力。	
As an ancient Chinese adage goes, "The greatest ideal is to create a world truly shared by all." Peace, development, equality, justice, democracy and freedom are common values of all mankind and the lofty goals of the United Nations. Yet these goals are far from being achieved; therefore we must continue our endeavors. In today's world, all countries are interdependent and share a common future. We should renew our commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, build a new model of international relations featuring mutually beneficial cooperation, and create a community of shared future for mankind. To achieve this goal, we need to direct our efforts as follows:
——我们要建立平等相待、互商互谅的伙伴关系。联合国宪章贯穿主权平等原则。世界的前途命运必须由各国共同掌握。世界各国一律平等，不能以大压小、以强凌弱、以富欺贫。主权原则不仅体现在各国主权和领土完整不容侵犯、内政不容干涉，还应该体现在各国自主选择社会制度和发展道路的权利应当得到维护，体现在各国推动经济社会发展、改善人民生活的实践应当受到尊重。	
— We should build partnerships in which countries treat each other as equals, engage in mutual consultation and show mutual understanding. The principle of sovereign equality underpins the Charter of the United Nations. The future of the world must be shaped by all countries. All countries are equals. The large, the strong and the rich should not bully the small, the weak and the poor. The principle of sovereignty is not just limited to the idea that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries is inviolable, and that their internal affairs are not to be subject to interference. It also means that all countries have a right to make their own choice of social systems and development paths, that this right should be upheld, and that all countries' endeavors to promote economic and social development and improve their people's lives should be respected.
我们要坚持多边主义，不搞单边主义；要奉行双赢、多赢、共赢的新理念，扔掉我赢你输、赢者通吃的旧思维。协商是民主的重要形式，也应该成为现代国际治理的重要方法，要倡导以对话解争端、以协商化分歧。我们要在国际和区域层面建设全球伙伴关系，走出一条“对话而不对抗，结伴而不结盟”的国与国交往新路。大国之间相处，要不冲突、不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢。大国与小国相处，要平等相待，践行正确义利观，义利相兼，义重于利。	
We should be committed to multilateralism and reject unilateralism. We should adopt a new vision of seeking positive outcomes for all, and reject the outdated mindset that one side's gain means the other side's loss, or that the winner takes all. Consultation is an important form of democracy, and it should also become an important means of exercising international governance. We should resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation. We should forge a global partnership at both international and regional levels, and embrace a new approach to state-to-state relations, one that features dialogue rather than confrontation, and seeks partnership rather than alliance. Major countries should follow the principles of no conflict, no confrontation, mutual respect and mutually beneficial cooperation in handling their relations. Major powers should treat small countries as equals, and take an ethical approach to justice and their own interests by putting justice before their own interests.
——我们要营造公道正义、共建共享的安全格局。在经济全球化时代，各国安全相互关联、彼此影响。没有一个国家能凭一己之力谋求自身绝对安全，也没有一个国家可以从别国的动荡中收获稳定。弱肉强食是丛林法则，不是国与国相处之道。穷兵黩武是霸道做法，只能搬起石头砸自己的脚。	
— We should create a security environment featuring fairness, justice, joint participation and shared benefits. In the age of economic globalization, the security of all countries is interlinked and every one impacts on every other. No country can maintain absolute security by its own efforts, and no country can achieve stability by destabilizing other countries. The law of the jungle leaves the weak at the mercy of the strong; it is not the way for countries to conduct their relations. Those who adopt the self-serving approach of using force will find that they are only lifting a rock to drop on their own feet.
我们要摒弃一切形式的冷战思维，树立共同、综合、合作、可持续安全的新观念。我们要充分发挥联合国及其安理会在止战维和方面的核心作用，通过和平解决争端和强制性行动双轨并举，化干戈为玉帛。我们要推动经济和社会领域的国际合作齐头并进，统筹应对传统和非传统安全威胁，防战争祸患于未然。	
We should abandon the Cold War mentality in all its manifestations, and foster a new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should give full play to the central role of the United Nations and its Security Council in ending conflict and keeping peace, and adopt the dual approach of seeking peaceful solutions to disputes and taking mandatory actions, so as to turn hostility into amity. We should advance international cooperation in both economic and social fields and take a holistic approach to addressing traditional and non-traditional security threats, so as to prevent conflicts from breaking out in the first place.
——我们要谋求开放创新、包容互惠的发展前景。2008年爆发的国际经济金融危机告诉我们，放任资本逐利，其结果将是引发新一轮危机。缺乏道德的市场，难以撑起世界繁荣发展的大厦。富者愈富、穷者愈穷的局面不仅难以持续，也有违公平正义。要用好“看不见的手”和“看得见的手”，努力形成市场作用和政府作用有机统一、相互促进，打造兼顾效率和公平的规范格局。	
— We should promote open, innovative and inclusive development that benefits all. The 2008 international financial crisis has taught us that allowing capital to blindly pursue profit will result in chaos, and that global prosperity cannot be built on the shaky foundations of a market without moral constraints. The growing gap between rich and poor is both unfair and unsustainable. It is important for us to use both the invisible hand and the visible hand to form synergy between market forces and government functions, and strive to achieve both efficiency and fairness.
大家一起发展才是真发展，可持续发展才是好发展。要实现这一目标，就应该秉承开放精神，推进互帮互助、互惠互利。当今世界仍有8亿人生活在极端贫困之中，每年近600万孩子在5岁前夭折，近6000万儿童未能接受教育。刚刚闭幕的联合国发展峰会制定了2015年后发展议程。我们要将承诺变为行动，共同营造人人免于匮乏、获得发展、享有尊严的光明前景。	
Development is meaningful only when it is inclusive and sustainable. To achieve such development requires openness, mutual assistance and cooperation. In the world today, close to 800 million people still live in extreme poverty, nearly 6 million children die before the age of five each year, and nearly 60 million children are unable to go to school. The just-concluded UN Sustainable Development Summit adopted the Post-2015 Development Agenda. We must translate our commitments into actions and work together to ensure that everyone is free from want, has access to development, and lives with dignity.
——我们要促进和而不同、兼收并蓄的文明交流。人类文明多样性赋予这个世界姹紫嫣红的色彩，多样带来交流，交流孕育融合，融合产生进步。	
— We should increase inter-civilization exchanges to promote harmony, inclusiveness and respect for differences. The world is more colorful as a result of its cultural diversity. Diversity breeds exchanges, exchanges create integration, and integration makes progress possible.
文明相处需要和而不同的精神。只有在多样中相互尊重、彼此借鉴、和谐共存，这个世界才能丰富多彩、欣欣向荣。不同文明凝聚着不同民族的智慧和贡献，没有高低之别，更无优劣之分。文明之间要对话，不要排斥；要交流，不要取代。人类历史就是一幅不同文明相互交流、互鉴、融合的宏伟画卷。我们要尊重各种文明，平等相待，互学互鉴，兼收并蓄，推动人类文明实现创造性发展。	
In their interactions, civilizations must accept their differences. Only through mutual respect, mutual learning, and harmonious coexistence can the world maintain its diversity and thrive. Each social model represents the unique vision and contribution of its people, and no model is superior to others. Different civilizations should engage in dialogue and exchanges instead of trying to exclude or replace each other. The history of mankind is a process of active exchanges, interactions, and integration among different civilizations. We should respect all civilizations and treat each other as equals. We should draw inspiration from each other to boost the creative development of human civilization.
——我们要构筑尊崇自然、绿色发展的生态体系。人类可以利用自然、改造自然，但归根结底是自然的一部分，必须呵护自然，不能凌驾于自然之上。我们要解决好工业文明带来的矛盾，以人与自然和谐相处为目标，实现世界的可持续发展和人的全面发展。	
— We should build an ecosystem that puts Mother Nature and green development first. Mankind may utilize nature and even try to transform it. But we are ultimately a part of nature. We should care for nature and not place ourselves above it. We should reconcile industrial development with nature and pursue harmony between man and nature to achieve sustainable development throughout the world and the all-round development of humanity.
建设生态文明关乎人类未来。国际社会应该携手同行，共谋全球生态文明建设之路，牢固树立尊重自然、顺应自然、保护自然的意识，坚持走绿色、低碳、循环、可持续发展之路。在这方面，中国责无旁贷，将继续作出自己的贡献。同时，我们敦促发达国家承担历史性责任，兑现减排承诺，并帮助发展中国家减缓和适应气候变化。	
To build a sound ecology is vital for mankind's future. All members of the international community should work together to build a sound global eco-environment. We should respect nature, follow nature's ways, and protect nature. We should firmly pursue green, low-carbon, circular, and sustainable development. China will shoulder its share of responsibility and continue to play its part in this common endeavor. We also urge developed countries to fulfill their historical responsibilities, honor their emission reduction commitments, and help developing countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
13亿多中国人民正在为实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而奋斗。中国人民的梦想同各国人民的梦想息息相通。实现中国梦，离不开和平的国际环境和稳定的国际秩序，离不开各国人民的理解、支持、帮助。中国人民圆梦必将给各国创造更多机遇，必将更好促进世界和平与发展。	
More than 1.3 billion Chinese people are endeavoring to realize the Chinese Dream of great national renewal. The dream of the Chinese people is closely connected with the dreams of other peoples of the world. We cannot realize the Chinese Dream without a peaceful international environment, a stable international order, and the understanding, support and help of the rest of the world. The realization of the Chinese Dream will bring greater opportunities to other countries and contribute to global peace and development.
中国将始终做世界和平的建设者，坚定走和平发展道路，无论国际形势如何变化，无论自身如何发展，中国永不称霸、永不扩张、永不谋求势力范围。	
China will continue to participate in building world peace. We are committed to peaceful development. No matter how the international landscape may evolve and how strong we may become, China will never pursue hegemony or expansion, or seek to create spheres of influence.
中国将始终做全球发展的贡献者，坚持走共同发展道路，继续奉行互利共赢的开放战略，将自身发展经验和机遇同世界各国分享，欢迎各国搭乘中国发展“顺风车”，一起来实现共同发展。	
China will continue to contribute to global development. We will continue to pursue common progress and the mutually beneficial strategy of opening up. We are ready to share our experience and opportunities with other countries and welcome them to join us on our voyage and sail together with us towards common development.
中国将始终做国际秩序的维护者，坚持走合作发展的道路。中国是第一个在联合国宪章上签字的国家，将继续维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序和国际体系。中国将继续同广大发展中国家站在一起，坚定支持增加发展中国家特别是非洲国家在国际治理体系中的代表性和发言权。中国在联合国的一票永远属于发展中国家。	
China will continue to uphold the international order. We will remain committed to the path of development through cooperation. China was the first country to put its signature on the Charter of the United Nations. We will continue to uphold the international order and system underpinned by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. China will continue to stand together with other developing countries. We firmly support greater representation and say for developing countries, especially African countries, in international governance. China's vote in the United Nations will always belong to the developing countries.
在此，我宣布，中国决定设立为期10年、总额10亿美元的中国－联合国和平与发展基金，支持联合国工作，促进多边合作事业，为世界和平与发展作出新的贡献。我宣布，中国将加入新的联合国维和能力待命机制，决定为此率先组建常备成建制维和警队，并建设8000人规模的维和待命部队。我宣布，中国决定在未来5年内，向非盟提供总额为1亿美元的无偿军事援助，以支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设。	
I wish to take this opportunity to announce China's decision to establish a 10-year, US$1 billion China-UN peace and development fund to support the United Nations' work, advance multilateral cooperation, and make a greater contribution to world peace and development. I wish to announce that China will join the new UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, and has thus decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad and building a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops. I also wish to announce that China will provide a total of US$100 million of free military aid to the African Union in the next five years to support the establishment of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
主席先生、各位同事！	
Mr. President, Dear Colleagues,
在联合国迎来又一个10年之际，让我们更加紧密地团结起来，携手构建合作共赢新伙伴，同心打造人类命运共同体。让铸剑为犁、永不再战的理念深植人心，让发展繁荣、公平正义的理念践行人间！	
As the United Nations enters a new decade, let us unite ever more closely to create a new mutually beneficial partnership and community of shared future for mankind. Let the vision of a world free of war and enjoying lasting peace take root in our hearts. Let the aspirations of development, prosperity, fairness and justice spread across the world!
谢谢各位。	
Thank you.
106. 习近平在联合国维和峰会上的讲话
中国为和平而来
——在联合国维和峰会上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年9月28日，纽约）
China Is Here for Peace
-- Speech at the UN Peacekeeping Summit
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
New York, September 28, 2015
尊敬的奥巴马总统，
尊敬的潘基文秘书长，
各位同事：	Your Excellency President Obama,
Your Excellency Secretary General Ban Ki-moon,
Dear Colleagues,
我赞赏奥巴马总统倡议召开这次维和峰会。	
I appreciate President Obama's initiative in convening this peacekeeping summit.
和平是人类共同愿望和崇高目标。联合国维和行动为和平而生，为和平而存，成为维护世界和平与安全的重要途径。维和行动给冲突地区带去信心，让当地民众看到希望。	
Peace is the common aspiration and lofty goal shared by all mankind. It was for the purpose of securing peace that the UN peacekeeping operations came into being. Now as an important means of upholding world peace and security, these peacekeeping operations bring confidence to areas beset by conflict and hope to the local people who are its victims.
当前，在世界很多地方，冲突地区民众依然饱受战乱之苦，对和平的渴望更加强烈，对联合国的期待更加殷切，对维和行动的期盼更加凸显。中国主张：	
As we speak, people in many conflict-ridden places around the world are still suffering. They have a deep yearning for peace, higher hopes for the United Nations, and greater expectations for its peacekeeping operations. The following is what China stands for:
—— 恪守维和基本原则。联合国宪章和哈马舍尔德原则是维和行动的根本指南，应该继续坚持。联合国安理会决议应该得到完整执行，任何国家不能越权行事。维和行动要根据当地形势和人民意愿，及时制定并落实撤出战略。	
-- The basic principles of peacekeeping should be strictly followed. The Charter of the United Nations and the Hammarskjold principles -- the fundamental guidelines for peacekeeping operations -- should continue to be respected. Security Council resolutions should be implemented in their entirety, allowing no country to act beyond their mandate. Peacekeeping missions should be carried out according to local situation and the will of the local people. Exit strategies need to be formulated and executed in a timely manner.
—— 完善维和行动体系。维和行动既要同预防外交、建设和平纵向衔接，也要同政治斡旋、推进法治、民族和解、民生改善等横向配合。联合国安理会要更多听取当事国和出兵国意见。联合国应该同相关地区组织建立更协调的维和伙伴关系。
-- The peacekeeping system needs to be improved. Peacekeeping operations should be aligned in sequence with preventive diplomacy and peace-building, and at the same time coordinate with political mediation, rule of law, national reconciliation, and improvement of living standards. The UN Security Council should be more attentive to the opinions of those parties directly involved, and the views of those countries which are contributing troops. A better coordinated peacekeeping partnership should be established between the United Nations and relevant regional organizations.
—— 提高快速反应水平。维和行动快速部署，能为和平争取机会，为生命赢得时间。中国欢迎联合国实施新的“维和能力待命机制”，呼吁会员国积极加入。	
-- Rapid response needs to be enhanced. Fast deployment of peacekeeping operations can bring better prospects of peace and win more time to save lives. China welcomes the United Nations' establishment of a new Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, and calls on member states to join the system.
—— 加大对非洲的帮扶。维和行动的主要需求在非洲。从长远计，国际社会和联合国要支持非洲国家提高自身维和维稳能力，以非洲方式解决非洲问题。	
-- Greater support and help should be given to Africa. Africa has the greatest need for peacekeeping. In the long run, the international community and the United Nations should support African countries in increasing their own capacity to maintain peace and stability, so that African issues can be addressed in ways that are adapted to African needs.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国，参加维和行动已经25年了，成为维和行动主要出兵国和出资国。为支持改进和加强联合国维和行动，我宣布：	
As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has taken part in peacekeeping operations for 25 years. We are a principal contributor of troops and funds to these operations. To support the improvement and strengthening of UN peacekeeping operations, I hereby announce that:
第一，中国将加入新的联合国维和能力待命机制，决定为此率先组建常备成建制维和警队，并建设8000人规模的维和待命部队。	
First, China will join the new UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and has thus decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad and build a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops.
第二，中国将积极考虑应联合国要求，派更多工程、运输、医疗人员参与维和行动。	
Second, China will give favorable consideration to UN requests for more Chinese engineering troops and transport and medical staff to take part in UN peacekeeping operations.
第三，今后5年，中国将为各国培训2000名维和人员，开展10个扫雷援助项目，包括提供培训和器材。	
Third, in the coming five years, China will train 2,000 peacekeepers from other countries, and carry out 10 mine clearance assistance programs which will include the provision of training and equipment.
第四，今后5年，中国将向非盟提供总额为1亿美元的无偿军事援助，以支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设。	
Fourth, in the coming five years, China will provide free military aid of US$100 million to the African Union to support the building of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
第五，中国将向联合国在非洲的维和行动部署首支直升机分队。	
Fifth, China will send its first peacekeeping helicopter squad to UN peacekeeping operations in Africa.
第六，中国-联合国和平与发展基金的部分资金将用于支持联合国维和行动。	
Sixth, part of the China-UN peace and development fund will be used to support UN peacekeeping operations.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
在联合国维和行动中，已有18位中国军人和警察牺牲。5年前，中国维和女警察和志虹在海地执行联合国维和任务时不幸殉职，留下年仅4岁的幼子和年逾花甲的父母。她曾经写道：“于大千世界，我也许只是一根羽毛，但我也要以羽毛的方式，承载和平的心愿。”
Eighteen Chinese men and women in uniform have laid down their lives in UN peacekeeping operations. Five years ago, we lost He Zhihong, a peacekeeping policewoman in the UN peacekeeping mission in Haiti. She left a four-year-old son and elderly parents. She once wrote: "In this vast world, I may be just like a small feather. But even so, I want this feather to carry the wish for peace."
这是她生前的愿望，也是中国对和平的承诺。	
This was her wish, and it is also China's commitment to peace.
谢谢！	
Thank you.
115. 习近平在金砖国家领导人第七次会晤上的讲话
共建伙伴关系 共创美好未来
——在金砖国家领导人第七次会晤上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年7月9日，乌法）
Building Partnership Together Toward a Bright Future
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Seventh BRICS Summit
Ufa, 9 July 2015
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的祖马总统，
尊敬的罗塞夫总统，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
President Putin,
Prime Minister Modi,
President Zuma,
President Rousseff,
Friends, Ladies and Gentlemen,
很高兴在美丽的乌法同大家再次会晤。感谢普京总统和俄罗斯政府所做的周到安排。	
It gives me great pleasure to meet all of you again in the beautiful city of Ufa. I wish to thank President Putin and the Russian government for the thoughtful arrangement.
这次乌法会晤是金砖国家领导人会晤时隔6年再次来到俄罗斯，对金砖国家合作进程具有重要意义。6年来，金砖国家合作走过了一段不平凡的历程。	
The Ufa Summit has brought BRICS leaders back to Russia after six years, which, in my view, is of great significance to the BRICS process. The past six years has indeed witnessed a momentous journey for BRICS cooperation.
——我们秉持国际公平正义，推动国际关系民主化，在许多重大国际和地区问题上，站在新兴市场国家和发展中国家的立场共同发声，呼吁遵守联合国宪章宗旨和原则以及国际法和国际关系基本准则，通过政治和外交手段和平解决国际争端。	
-- We have stood for international equity, justice and greater democracy in international relations, spoken with one voice for the emerging markets and developing countries on many major international and regional issues, called for full compliance with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, the international law and basic norms of international relations, and pushed for peaceful settlement of international disputes through political and diplomatic means.
——我们推动世界经济增长，完善全球经济治理，加强新兴市场国家和发展中国家在国际经济金融事务中的代表性和话语权，让世界银行、国际货币基金组织等传统国际金融机构取得新进展，焕发新活力。	
-- We have worked to promote world economic growth, improve global economic governance, and enhance the representation and voice of the emerging markets and developing countries in international economic and financial affairs, and provided new momentum and drive to the World Bank, IMF and other traditional international financial institutions.
——我们拓展合作领域，从无到有，从小到大，涵盖政治、经济、金融、贸易、社会、人文等多个领域，形成多层次、全方位合作架构。金砖国家新开发银行筹建工作全面展开，应急储备安排正式启动，充分证明了金砖国家合作的有效性和行动力。	
-- We have expanded the scope of our cooperation step by step, and put in place a multi-layered and all-dimensional structure of cooperation, covering political, economic, financial, trade, social, cultural and people-to-people exchanges. We have kicked off the preparations for the New Development Bank and launched the Contingent Reserve Arrangement, which testifies to the effectiveness and capability of BRICS cooperation.
当前，世界经济仍然处于国际金融危机后的深度调整期，不稳定不确定因素增多。新兴市场国家和发展中国家风险和挑战不断集聚，经济增速普遍放缓，金砖国家各国发展也面临不少困难和挑战。	
At present, the world economy is still undergoing deep adjustment in the wake of the international financial crisis, and factors of instability and uncertainty are on the increase. To the emerging markets and developing world in general, risks and challenges continue to mount and economic growth has slowed down. The BRICS members, in particular, are faced with multiple difficulties and challenges.
越是在困难的时候，越要坚定信心。应该看到，任何进步都不是直线的，有曲折也有反复。尽管会有这样那样的困难，但金砖国家拥有丰富自然和人力资源、广阔国内市场、巨大发展潜力、充裕政策空间，上升趋势不会改变。	
The harder the times, the more valuable our confidence is. We must understand that progress can never be a straight line, and it is likely to go zig-zag and even suffer setbacks. The BRICS countries are blessed with plentiful natural and human resources, and enjoy such strengths as vast domestic markets, huge development potential and ample policy space. Even though there are difficulties along the way, the rise of the BRICS is irreversible.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
当前，国际形势错综复杂，金砖国家机遇和挑战并存，我们应该加强合作、携手并进，继续做推动全球发展的领跑者。去年在巴西福塔莱萨，我们一致决定本着开放、包容、合作、共赢精神，深化金砖国家伙伴关系。今年的东道国俄罗斯也将“金砖国家伙伴关系”作为会晤主题，说明这一理念已经深入人心。	
The current international situation remains intricate and complex, with opportunities and challenges juxtaposed for the BRICS countries. We must enhance our cooperation, strengthen our unity, and continue to display leadership in promoting global growth. In Fortaleza last year, we made the decision to deepen BRICS partnership in the spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation. This year, our host Russia has also made BRICS partnership the theme of the summit. This shows that partnership as a notion has struck deep roots in our hearts.
下面，我愿就加强金砖国家伙伴关系谈几点看法。	
Now, let me share with you some of my observations on how to strengthen that partnership.
第一，构建维护世界和平的伙伴关系。当前，和平发展的时代潮流更加强劲，但世界仍然很不太平，局部动荡此起彼伏，恐怖主义、毒品威胁、重大疫情、自然灾害等非传统安全挑战层出不穷。金砖国家应该倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，协调行动，相互支援，携手应对这些全球性问题。我们要共同防范和打击一切形式的恐怖主义，在反恐经验交流、情报分享、线索核查、执法合作等领域开展合作。中方支持加快金砖国家禁毒合作机制化进程，将同其他成员国携手推动解决地区和全球毒品问题。	
First, we need to build a partnership for world peace. Despite the growing trend of our times for peace and development, the world is far from being tranquil. Local volatilities keep cropping up, and such non-traditional security threats as terrorism, narcotics, major epidemic diseases and natural disasters continue to emerge. The BRICS countries should champion a new approach of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, take coordinated actions, come to each other's support, and work in concert to address such global challenges. We should guard against and combat all forms of terrorism, while cooperating in the sharing of experience and intelligence against terrorism, verification of criminal leads and law enforcement. China supports accelerating the building of the institutional framework for anti-narcotics cooperation, and is ready to join other member states in resolving the issue of narcotic drugs at both regional and global levels.
忘记历史就意味着背叛。今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利暨联合国成立70周年。金砖国家应该同世界上所有热爱和平的国家和人民一道，坚决反对否认、歪曲、篡改第二次世界大战历史的图谋和行径，共同维护第二次世界大战胜利成果和国际公平正义。同时，要以史为鉴，摒弃冷战思维，拒绝零和博弈，共同维护地区和世界和平稳定。	
Forgetting history is tantamount to betrayal. This year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the world war against fascism and the founding of the United Nations. The BRICS countries should join all the peace-loving countries and peoples in the world in firmly opposing any attempt or action to deny, distort or even tamper with the history of that war, and in upholding its victorious outcome and international equity and justice. At the same time, we must learn the lessons of history, do away with the Cold War mentality and reject the zero-sum game, and work together to maintain peace and stability in various regions and across the world.
我们要继续致力于推动国际关系民主化。在国际关系中动辄制裁或以制裁相威胁，无助于解决问题。要倡导通过对话和谈判，以和平和政治方式解决分歧。	
We should stay committed to promoting democracy in international relations. The use or threat of sanctions in international relations at every turn will not help solve problems. Dialogue and negotiation should play a useful part in settling differences peacefully and politically.
第二，构建促进共同发展的伙伴关系。金砖国家合作事业要繁荣昌盛，就要强本固基，打造金砖国家利益共同体。我们要以建设利益共享的价值链和利益融合的大市场为目标，共同构建更紧密经济伙伴关系，发挥各成员国在资源禀赋、产业结构上的互补优势，合力拓展更大发展空间。要同步推进金砖国家新开发银行总部和非洲区域中心建设，争取尽早投入运作，取得早期收获。落实好金砖国家经济伙伴战略，发掘新的合作亮点。	
Second, we need to build a partnership for common development.The continued success of BRICS cooperation hinges on laying a solid foundation, a community of shared interests among the BRICS countries. For the purpose of building a value chain of shared benefits and a big market of integrated interests, we should build an even closer economic partnership, leverage our complementary strengths in resource endowment and industrial structure and expand our development horizons through collective efforts. We should strive for simultaneous progress in building the New Development Bank headquarters and its African regional center, so that they will become operational sooner and produce early harvest. The BRICS economic partnership strategy needs to be implemented effectively with a view to identifying new areas of cooperation.
我们要继续致力于促进发展中国家共同发展繁荣。今年是国际发展年和气候变化年，金砖国家应该加强协调和配合，在2015年后发展议程、气候变化等重大国际发展议题上，维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益，引导2015年后发展议程谈判重点关注解决发展中国家特别是非洲国家和最不发达国家面临的困难和挑战。	
We need to stay committed to promoting common development and common prosperity of all developing nations. International development and climate change are among the top priorities of this year. The BRICS countries ought to step up their coordination and cooperation by upholding the common interest of emerging markets and developing countries on such major issues as the post-2015 development agenda and climate change, and by focusing on the difficulties and challenges of developing countries, African countries and the least developed countries in particular.
第三，构建弘扬多元文明的伙伴关系。金砖国家合作的成功充分证明，不同社会制度可以相互包容，不同发展模式可以相互合作，不同价值文化可以相互交流。我们要坚持开放包容，在交流互鉴中取长补短，在求同存异中共同前进。	
Third, we need to build a partnership for inter-civilization dialogue. The successful cooperation of the BRICS countries proves that different social systems can accommodate each other, that different development models can work with each other and that different values can draw on the strength of each other. We should stay open and inclusive so as to learn from each other and make progress together through seeking common ground while putting aside differences.
金砖国家分处四大洲、地跨南北半球，具有独特地理优势，我们要利用好这一优势，积极开展同其他国家和国际组织对话和交流，分享合作成果。要加强同其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家团结合作，不断壮大我们的力量，扩大金砖国家代表性和影响力。	
Located in four continents and two hemispheres, the BRICS countries have unique geographical advantages. We should make good use of such advantages by actively conducting dialogues and exchanges and sharing the achievements of cooperation with other countries and international organizations. We will build up our ranks and boost our representation and influence if we can enhance our solidarity and cooperation with other emerging markets and developing countries.
第四，构建加强全球经济治理的伙伴关系。国际经济规则需要不断革故鼎新，以适应全球增长格局新变化，让责任和能力相匹配。我们要共同致力于提高金砖国家在全球治理体系中的地位和作用，推动国际经济秩序顺应新兴市场国家和发展中国家力量上升的历史趋势。推动改革国际货币基金组织治理结构，增加新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权。倡导建设开放型世界经济，支持多边贸易体制，推动多哈回合谈判维护新兴市场国家和发展中国家的正当权益，确保各国在国际经贸活动中机会平等、规则平等、权利平等。
Fourth, we need to build a partnership for more effective global economic governance. International economic rules need constant updating in order to reflect changes in global growth pattern and ensure that a country's responsibilities are commensurate with its capabilities. We need to work together to enhance the stature and role of the BRICS countries in the global governance system, and help shape the international economic order in such a way that conforms to the historical trend of rising emerging markets and developing countries. We should promote reform to the governance structure of the IMF and increase the representation and voice of the emerging markets and developing countries. We should champion an open global economy, support the multilateral trading regime, take the Doha Round negotiations forward in a way that upholds the legitimate rights and interests of the emerging markets and developing countries, and ensure countries equal access to opportunities, rules and rights in international economic and trade activities.
金砖国家要加强在信息安全和互联网管理方面合作，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间，争取平等参与互联网治理权利。移民问题同金砖各国经济发展和社会稳定密切相关，我们也应该加强这一领域交流合作。	
The BRICS countries need to strengthen cooperation in information security and Internet management, jointly foster a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cyberspace, and strive for equal rights to participate in Internet governance. We should also enhance our exchanges and cooperation on migration, an issue that is closely related to economic development and social stability of the BRICS countries.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
正如我刚才提到的，我们各自国家发展都面临新的机遇和挑战。金砖国家发展阶段相似，所面临的机遇和挑战也有一定相通之处。我们应该加强治国理政经验交流，增进彼此了解，加强学习借鉴，共同探索解决问题的办法。	
As I said earlier, all our countries have before them new opportunities and challenges in their respective national development. With similar stages of development, the BRICS countries may share somewhat similar features in their opportunities and challenges. It is, therefore, necessary for us to compare notes in our respective governance, increase mutual understanding and mutual learning, and work together in search of solutions.
当前，中国正在协调推进全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党，规划了在新形势下治国理政的战略目标和战略举措。	
As for China, we are now making coordinated and comprehensive efforts to finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects, deepen reform, advance the rule of law and strictly enforce party discipline. We have laid out strategic goals and strategic steps for China's governance under new conditions.
全面建成小康社会是我们现阶段战略目标，也是实现中华民族伟大复兴中国梦关键一步。我们将继续坚持以经济建设为中心，致力于建设改革发展成果真正惠及人民，经济、政治、文化、社会、生态文明全面发展的小康社会。我们将坚定不移深化改革，推进国家治理体系和治理能力现代化，推动经济社会持续健康发展。我们将坚持依法治国、依法执政、依法行政共同推进，坚持法治国家、法治政府、法治社会一体建设，实现科学立法、严格执法、公正司法、全民守法。我们将全面推进中国共产党自身建设，提高党的自我完善、自我革新、自我提高能力，保持对腐败零容忍的高压态势，完善体制机制建设，不断增强执政能力。	
To finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects is our strategic goal of the present stage. It is also a critical step toward realizing the Chinese dream of great national renewal. We will continue to take economic development as our central task and stay committed to building in China an economically, politically, culturally, socially and ecologically advanced society, delivering tangible benefit of reform and development to the people. We will firmly deepen reform, modernizing our governance system and governance capabilities and promoting sustained and sound economic and social progress. We will promote the rule of law, exercise governance and administration in accordance with law, build a law-based country, law-based government and law-based society, and ensure legislation in a scientific way, strict law enforcement, impartial justice, and observance of law by all. We will comprehensively advance the building of the Communist Party of China itself, enhance the Party's capability for self-improvement, self-innovation and self-development, maintain zero-tolerance for corruption, step up institutional building, and constantly strengthen its governing capacity.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
我们今天的努力，关系30亿金砖国家人民的福祉，也关系整个世界和全人类的前途和未来。俄罗斯有句谚语：“通向成功的道路永远都是曲折坎坷的。”让我们踏上征程，携手建设金砖国家更紧密的伙伴关系，共同开创金砖国家更美好未来！	
What we do today bears on the well-being of the three billion people in the BRICS countries as well as on the destiny and future of the whole world and the entire mankind. As a Russian proverb goes, "The road to success is always bumpy and tortuous." So let us embark on this journey together, work hand in hand to build a closer partnership among the BRICS countries and create an even better future for us all.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
103. 习近平在金砖国家领导人非正式会晤上的讲话
开拓机遇 应对挑战
——在金砖国家领导人非正式会晤上的发言
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年11月15日，安塔利亚）
Expand Opportunities and Meet Challenges Together
-- Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Informal BRICS Leaders Meeting
Antalya, 15 November 2015
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的祖马总统，
尊敬的罗塞夫总统，
各位同事：	Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,
Your Excellency President Dilma Rousseff,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴再次见到各位同事。感谢普京总统主持今天的会晤。乌法会晤后，我们五国积极落实各项成果，加强相互沟通和协调，共同推动金砖国家合作取得了新进展。	
It is a great pleasure to join you again. I wish to thank President Putin for hosting today's meeting. After the Ufa summit, we the five BRICS countries have followed through on the outcomes, enhanced communication and coordination and made new progress in BRICS cooperation through joint efforts.
同时，国际形势发生新变化，世界经济复苏缓慢，地缘政治问题较前突出，全球性挑战不时涌现。在这个大背景下，金砖国家发展也面临一些新情况。一是外部环境中复杂和困难因素增多，全球总需求不足，各国宏观经济政策分化加剧，世界经济增长不确定性加大。二是受内外因素影响，金砖国家经济增长普遍放缓，发展进入调整期。三是国际上唱衰金砖国家的声音并未停止。	
Meanwhile, new developments have taken place in the international situation. Global economic recovery is slow, geopolitical issues are getting more prominent and challenges of a global scale have kept emerging. In this context, BRICS countries are faced with some new conditions for their development. First, the growing complexities and difficulties in the external environment. This is seen in the insufficient global demand, the increasingly divergent macroeconomic policies of individual countries, and the growing uncertainties facing global economic growth. Second, due to both domestic and external factors, BRICS countries are experiencing an economic slowdown, with development entering a phase of adjustment. Third, there has been continued talk of pessimism regarding BRICS countries' development.
真金不怕火炼。伙伴的意义和价值，不仅在于顺境中共襄盛举，更在于逆境时携手前行。只要我们坚定信心、加强协调，我们的合作就一定能乘风破浪、穿云破雾，让世界对金砖国家的成色有新的认识。	
Yet, as the saying goes, real gold does not fear the test of fire. True partnership is not just about celebrating success together. It is more about standing together in time of adversity. As long as we remain firm in our determination and enhance coordination, we will rise above challenges and overcome difficulties. We will prove to the world that BRICS cooperation delivers real shining gold.
对金砖国家更好发挥作用，我愿提出以下建议。	
I want to use today's opportunity to offer you the following lines of thought on how BRICS countries could play a greater role by working together.
（一）塑造有利外部发展环境，共同完善全球经济治理。近期，各国股市汇市及全球能源资源价格波动成因复杂，是国际金融危机深层次影响的传导效应。	
First, we need to cultivate a favorable external environment for development and jointly improve global economic governance. The recent volatility in the stock markets and foreign exchange markets as well as the fluctuating prices of energy and resources worldwide are attributable to complex causes. They are the result of the lingering impacts of the global financial crisis.
我们应该引导各方对金砖国家发展形成合理预期。要看到金砖国家经济增速虽然有所放缓，但新兴市场国家对世界经济增长的贡献超过50%，仍然是世界经济增长的重要引擎。展望未来，全球经济复苏仍然需要新兴市场国家提供后劲和动力。我们应该在二十国集团框架内加强合作，推动各方加大宏观经济政策协调力度，重点防范短期金融风险，避免货币战、贸易战。同时，我们也要未雨绸缪，加快推进金砖国家新开发银行和应急储备安排的机制建设，共同维护国际金融稳定。	
It is important that parties concerned form a sensible expectation for BRICS development. The economy of BRICS countries may have slowed down, but emerging economies contribute to over half of the growth of the global economy and remain its main engine. Going forward, world economic recovery won't be sustained without the support of emerging economies as the propeller and driving force. BRICS countries need to step up collaboration within the G20. We need to encourage greater macroeconomic policy coordination among parties concerned, with emphasis being given to preventing short-term financial risks to avert a currency war or a trade war. At the same time, we also need to improve financial preparedness by building up such mechanisms as the New Development Bank and the Contingent Reserve Arrangement to increase our capacity to ensure, together with other countries, global financial stability.
我们应该加强在国际货币基金组织、世界银行、世界贸易组织等机制内的协调和配合，着力提升发展中国家和新兴市场国家在国际治理体系中的代表性和发言权。日前，国际货币基金组织已经完成特别提款权审查报告，明确指出人民币满足可自由使用标准，建议将人民币纳入特别提款权货币篮子。中方对此表示欢迎，也期待金砖国家继续支持人民币“入篮”。这有利于完善国际货币体系，维护全球金融稳定，将是一个共赢的结果。	
BRICS countries also need to strengthen coordination and collaboration within the IMF, the World Bank, the WTO and other international institutions. This way, we could increase the representation and voice of developing countries as well as emerging markets in global governance. The IMF has just completed the SDR review report, which recognized the RMB as a "freely usable" currency and suggested the inclusion of the RMB in the SDR currency basket. China welcomes it and hopes to receive continued support from the BRICS countries for adding the RMB into the SDR basket. This serves the interests of all parties as it will help improve the international monetary system and uphold global financial stability.
（二）就重大国际和地区问题发声，共同应对各种全球性挑战。当今世界仍然不太平，地区冲突和热点问题远未解决，恐怖主义带来的危害更加突出。发生在巴黎的系列恐怖袭击事件再次表明，恐怖势力的能量和危害不容低估，恐怖主义已成为我们当前面临的最严峻和急迫的安全挑战。国际社会必须携起手来，按照联合国宪章宗旨和原则以及其他公认的国际关系基本准则，进一步加强反恐合作，特别要注重标本兼治，不搞双重标准。金砖国家应该在反恐经验交流、情报分享、线索核查、执法合作等领域开展广泛合作。	
Second, we need to make our voice heard on major international and regional issues and jointly tackle global challenges. The world today is not tranquil. Regional conflicts and flash-points need to be addressed. Terrorism is wreaking greater havoc. The terrorist attacks in Paris are yet another reminder that the impact and danger of terrorism are not to be underestimated and that terrorism has become the most serious and pressing security challenge for us. The international community must join forces, adhere to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and other basic norms governing international relations, and reinforce counter-terrorism cooperation. It is especially important to address both the symptoms and root causes of terrorism and reject double standards. BRICS countries need to conduct extensive cooperation in experience and intelligence sharing, in following leads on terrorism, and in law enforcement.
当前，欧洲难民问题突出，其根源在于地区不稳定和发展不平衡，解决的出路在于谋求和平、实现发展。近期，有关各方接连召开了两次叙利亚问题外长会议，在实现全面停火、启动政治进程、成立过渡管理机制、举行大选等方面达成了不少重要共识。我们要抓好落实，在联合国主持下，开启政治过渡进程，保持这一来之不易的势头。	
The ongoing refugee problem in Europe stems from regional instability and uneven development. The way out of it is through peace and development. Recently, relevant parties have had two foreign ministers' meetings on Syria in quick succession, reaching quite a few important consensus on such issues as having a comprehensive ceasefire, launching a political process, setting up a transitional governing body and holding a general election. We must follow up on these consensus and get the political transition started under the auspices of the United Nations in order to sustain this hard-won momentum.
（三）推动互利共赢的国际发展合作，共同倡导新型全球发展伙伴关系。今年是国际发展年。两个月前，我同各位同事一道出席了联合国发展峰会。我感到很多发展中国家关心金砖国家合作，期待金砖国家在发展问题和南南合作方面发挥作用。	
Third, we need to push forward win-win international cooperation on development and jointly advocate a new model of international development partnership. This year marks the Year of International Development. Two months ago, all of us attended the UN Sustainable Development Summit. I noted that many developing countries are interested in BRICS cooperation. They hope that BRICS countries could play a due role in addressing the development issue and in facilitating South-South cooperation.
我们应该同广大发展中国家一道，推动发达国家兑现承诺、履行义务，为建立更加多元开放、务实有效的新型全球发展伙伴关系而努力。我们应该结合落实2030年可持续发展议程，同发展中国家交流发展理念，分享发展经验，深化南南合作。我们不但要做执行2030年可持续发展议程的领跑者，而且要帮助其他发展中国家落实议程。	
So we need to join other developing countries to push developed countries to deliver on their development pledges and honor their obligations, and make joint efforts to foster a new model of global development partnership that is more diverse, open, effective and results-oriented. Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides an opportunity for us to exchange ideas and share best practices with other developing countries on development, so as to deepen South-South cooperation. BRICS countries may lead efforts for implementing the 2030 Agenda. Meanwhile, we may help other developing countries with their implementation endeavor.
（四）携手推进经济优化升级，共同实现长远发展。金砖国家正在相继进入中等收入国家行列，面临着相同或相似的任务。我们的发展模式要从依靠要素投入向依靠劳动生产率提高转变，发展理念要从侧重速度向注重质量和效益转变，经济结构要从相对单一向均衡合理转变，经济增长要从主要依靠出口向扩大内需转变。这四大转变为我们提供了新的合作空间和合作机遇。我们应该结合落实乌法会晤通过的金砖国家经济伙伴战略，携手打造利益共享的价值链和大市场。	
Fourth, we need to work hand in hand to advance economic upgrading and jointly realize long-term development. BRICS countries have more or less entered the rank of middle-income countries and face the same or similar mission for development. We need to shift our development model from one that relies on investing in production factors to one relying on greater labor productivity. Our development philosophy should no longer focus on speed but more on quality and efficiency. Our economic structure should be more balanced and supported by multiple pillars instead of a single pillar. And our growth should shift away from its dependence on export and be driven more by domestic demand. These four major shifts will provide us with new space and opportunities for cooperation. We need to follow through on the BRICS economic partnership strategy previously adopted at the Ufa summit to put in place a value chain and a greater market of shared interests of BRICS countries.
伴随结构调整和改革深化，中国越来越成为消费品市场和产能、资本输出国。我们希望同其他金砖国家共享发展机遇，提高经济合作水平。	
China is in a process of economic restructuring and deepening reforms. It is increasingly becoming a market of consumer goods and an exporter of production capacity and capital. China stands ready to share development opportunities with other BRICS countries to raise the level of BRICS economic cooperation.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会是当今世界格局和形势下一次非常重要的会议，我们要相互支持和呼应，进一步推动二十国集团从危机应对机制向长效治理机制转变，既注重周期性政策，也同步推动结构性改革。要建设开放型世界经济，反对贸易保护主义。要推动各方均采取负责任的宏观经济政策，力避负面外溢效应，共同扩大全球总需求。	
This G20 Antalya Summit is very important given the current international landscape and circumstances. We BRICS countries need to support and collaborate with each other and further facilitate a shift of the G20 from a mere crisis-response mechanism to a long-term governance mechanism that focuses on cyclical policies and parallel structural reforms. We need to promote an open global economy and stand against trade protectionism. We need to urge parties concerned to adopt macroeconomic policies that are truly responsible to avoid negative spillovers of these policies and jointly expand aggregate global demand.
中国将于明年举办二十国集团领导人第十一次峰会。中方感谢金砖成员国对中国办会的宝贵支持，将主办明年二十国集团领导人峰会视为推动金砖国家合作的重要机遇。	
China will play host to the 11th G20 Summit next year. China appreciates the valuable support given by other BRICS countries and sees the event as a major opportunity to advance BRICS cooperation.
明年，印度也将接任金砖国家主席国，中方会全力支持印方主办好明年金砖国家领导人会晤。希望这两场重要活动能够相互呼应，相得益彰，共同在新形势下为推动世界经济发展和深化金砖国家合作作出贡献。	
Also next year, India will assume the BRICS presidency, and China will give India its full support in hosting the BRICS leaders meeting. I hope these two major events will reinforce each other and that by working together, we could contribute our fair share to global economic growth and enhanced BRICS cooperation under new circumstances.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
86. 习近平在亚信第五次外长会议开幕式上的讲话
凝聚共识　促进对话
共创亚洲和平与繁荣的美好未来
——在亚信第五次外长会议开幕式上的讲话
（2016年4月28日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Jointly Create a Better Future of Peace and Prosperity for Asia Through Dialogue and Consensus
Speech by Chinese President Xi Jinping
At the Opening Ceremony of the Fifth Meeting of
The CICA Ministers of Foreign Affairs
Diaoyutai State Guesthouse, 28 April 2016
各位外长，各位来宾，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Foreign Ministers,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
“春夏之交，草木际天。”欢迎大家在这个生机盎然的时节来到北京。首先，我谨代表中国政府和人民，并以我个人的名义，对来自亚信成员国、观察员国的外长和代表以及有关国际组织的负责人和代表，表示诚挚的欢迎！对本次会议的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！	
Welcome to Beijing in the delightful season of late spring when the skyline is all lush green. At the outset, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I would like to extend my sincere welcome to the foreign ministers and representatives from CICA member states and observers and leading officials and representatives from relevant international organizations. Let me also offer my warm congratulations on the opening of the meeting.
这次会议是亚信外长会首次在中国举行，也是新形势下促进亚洲安全和发展、推动亚信建设的一件大事。会议以“以对话促安全”为主题，凝聚各方共识，促进亚洲安全，谋求共同发展，加强亚信作用，促进信任和协作。这对亚洲乃至世界安全和繁荣具有重要意义。
This is the first time for China to host the CICA Foreign Ministers' Meeting, which is an important occasion for promoting security and development in Asia and strengthening CICA's capacity in the new era. The meeting, under the theme of "promoting security through dialogue", will help pool consensus, contribute to security in Asia, seek common development, strengthen CICA's role, and enhance trust and coordination among CICA members. This is of great significance to security and prosperity in Asia and beyond.
当今世界正处在前所未有的历史性变革之中。和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流不可阻挡，同时我们所处的星球并不太平，维护世界和平、促进共同发展仍然任重道远。	
The world today is experiencing historic changes like never before. Peace, development and win-win cooperation represent an unstoppable trend of our time. That said, the planet where we live is not all tranquil. To maintain world peace and promote common development remains a long and arduous journey.
在世界和平与发展进程中，亚洲具有独特而重要的地位。今天的亚洲，和平稳定是大势所趋，发展繁荣是民心所向。亚洲经济领跑全球，区域合作和一体化进程方兴未艾，亚洲在全球发展全局中的战略地位不断上升。同时，亚洲局部动荡冲突等传统安全问题仍然存在，恐怖主义等非传统安全威胁日益突出，区域安全合作亟待加强。	
Asia holds a uniquely important position in the pursuit of world peace and development. Today in Asia, peace and stability is the defining trend, and development and prosperity represent the common aspirations of the people. As a world leader in economic development, Asia enjoys vibrant regional cooperation and integration and rising strategic status in the global development landscape. On the other hand, some parts of our continent are still plagued by turbulence and conflicts caused by traditional security challenges while terrorism and other non-traditional security threats are posing rising dangers to Asia. The situation cries out for ever closer regional security cooperation.
在2014年亚信上海峰会上，我倡议树立共同、综合、合作、可持续的亚洲安全观，走出一条共建共享共赢的亚洲安全之路。两年来，国际和地区形势发展变化表明，维护地区安全需要大家共同努力。我们要坚持和践行亚洲安全观，凝聚共识，促进对话，加强协作，推动构建具有亚洲特色的安全治理模式，共创亚洲和平与繁荣的美好未来。为此，我们要重点在以下方面作出努力。	
At the CICA Summit in Shanghai in 2014, I proposed a vision on common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security in Asia and called for joint efforts to explore an inclusive and win-win approach to Asian security that is for all and by all. Developments in the region and the world over the past two years show that it takes concerted efforts to uphold regional security. We need to adhere to and follow through the vision on Asian security, build consensus, step up dialogue and coordination, contribute to the fostering of a security governance model with Asian features, and open up a brighter future of peace and prosperity for Asia. To this end, we need to focus our endeavor in the following areas:
第一，把握方向，构建亚洲命运共同体。亚洲各国安危与共、命运相系。我们要发展合作共赢的新型伙伴关系，相互尊重，平等相待，守望相助，同舟共济，在追求本国利益时兼顾各国合理关切，在谋求本国发展时促进各国共同发展，在维护本国安全时尊重各国安全，一起来促进地区和平、稳定、繁荣。我们要深化军事政治、新威胁新挑战、经济、人文、环保等领域安全和信任措施建设合作，共同为亚洲安全和发展撑起一片蓝天。	
First, keep to the direction of building an Asian community of common future. Countries in Asia share weal and woe and the future of our nations is closely tied with each other. We need to develop a new type of partnership featuring win-win cooperation and live together in the spirit of mutual respect, equality, mutual assistance and solidarity. We should accommodate reasonable concerns of others while pursuing our own interests, promote common development while seeking our own development, respect security of others while safeguarding our own security, and join hands in advancing peace, stability and prosperity in the region. We need to deepen security cooperation and confidence-building in military, political, economic, people-to-people, cultural, environmental protection and other fields as well as in tackling emerging threats and challenges, so as to open up new prospects for security and development in Asia.
第二，夯实基础，推动不同文明交流互鉴。亚洲民族、宗教、文化多样，社会制度、发展道路、经济发展水平各异，对有关安全问题的认知和关切不尽相同。在这样的情况下，我们要加强交流、加强沟通，把亚洲多样性转化为扩大交流合作的动力，推动不同文明包容互鉴、共同发展，为维护地区和平稳定发挥作用。各方可以通过参与亚洲文明对话大会等平台和手段，汇聚智慧和力量，为地区安全综合治理营造更加深厚的基础。	
Second, cement the foundation for exchanges and mutual learning among different civilizations. Asia is home to a diversity of nations, religions and cultures, and countries vary in social system, development path and economic development level. Our perceptions and concerns on relevant security issues may not always be the same. Given such a reality, we need to scale up exchanges and communication and turn the diversity of Asia into an impetus for more exchanges and cooperation, and facilitate inclusiveness, mutual learning and common development of different civilizations, to make joint contribution to maintaining regional peace and stability. We can together explore channels and platforms, such as an Asia Civilization Dialogue Conference to pool wisdom and strength and solidify the foundation for comprehensive regional security governance.
第三，互谅互让，坚持对话协商和平解决争议。“恃德者昌，恃力者亡。”弱肉强食有违时代潮流，穷兵黩武缔造不了和平，互谅互让才能带来稳定，坚守道义才能赢得持久安全。我们要坚持通过对话协商，依据国际法，坚持以和平方式解决争议问题，以对话增互信，以对话解纷争，以对话促安全。针对复杂的地区热点问题，有关各方要保持冷静、坚守和平，避免采取使局势升级的行动，通过建立规则机制管控危机，通过增进互信缓和紧张，通过政治手段化解危机，逐步推动问题解决。	
Third, uphold mutual understanding and mutual accommodation and peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue and consultation. As a Chinese adage reads, "he who cherishes virtue prospers and he who favors might perishes." The law of the jungle goes against the trend of the time and belligerence cannot lead to peace. Only mutual understanding and mutual accommodation will bring about stability and only commitment to justice can ensure lasting security. We need to uphold peaceful settlement of disputes through dialogue and consultation in accordance with international law. We need to enhance trust, resolve disagreements and promote security through dialogue. Faced with complex regional hotspot issues, relevant parties need to stay calm and commit to peace, refrain from taking actions that may escalate the situation, promote crisis management through rules-making, and de-escalate tension by strengthening mutual trust, with a view to defusing crisis through political means and promoting gradual resolution.
第四，循序渐进，探讨建立符合地区特点的安全架构。亚洲存在多个安全合作机制，在维护地区安全方面都发挥着一定作用。我们要坚持和发扬亚洲国家长期以来形成的相互尊重、协商一致、照顾各方舒适度的亚洲方式，加强地区各项安全机制协调，围绕彼此一致或相近目标逐步开展合作，形成合力，求得实效。在此基础上，可以逐步探讨构建符合亚洲特点的地区安全合作新架构。亚信非政府论坛等平台可以就此进行研讨，就地区安全合作的原则、重点方向等提出设想和建议。	
Fourth, gradually explore the building of a security architecture that fits regional conditions. There exist multiple security cooperation frameworks in Asia, and they all contribute to regional security in their own way. Asian countries have long cherished the Asian way of mutual respect, consensus-building and accommodation of each other's comfort levels. We should uphold and promote this approach, strengthen coordination among regional security frameworks, and gradually channel cooperation toward the same or similar goals to create synergy and work for practical results. On such basis, we may explore the building of a new architecture of regional security cooperation that reflects Asian needs. We can discuss relevant matters at such platforms as the CICA Non-governmental Forum and put forward ideas and suggestions on the principles and priorities of regional security cooperation.
当今世界，合作潮流浩浩荡荡，包容理念深入人心。亚洲国家和人民有能力更有需要通过对话和合作维护亚洲安全和发展环境。亚洲一贯具有开放包容的传统，也拥有登高望远的智慧。我们欢迎域外国家为亚洲和平与发展贡献正能量，同亚洲国家一起促进亚洲安全稳定和发展繁荣。亚洲稳定了、发展了，对世界有利；亚洲混乱了、衰落了，对世界不利。这是近代以来亚洲历史告诉人们的一个深刻道理。	
People around the world yearn for cooperation and inclusiveness. And countries and peoples in Asia have the ability and see the pressing need to maintain a sound environment of security and development in Asia through dialogue and cooperation. Asians are known to be open, inclusive and visionary. We welcome countries outside the region making positive contribution to peace and stability here and working with Asian countries to promote security, stability, development and prosperity of Asia. A stable and developing Asia is a blessing, while a turbulent and declining Asia would bring nothing but trouble to the world. This is a profound lesson drawn from modern Asian history.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
中国奉行和平外交政策，提出并带头践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的亚洲安全观，始终是国际和地区安全的维护者、建设者、贡献者。中国坚定不移走和平发展道路，坚定不移维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序，坚定不移推动构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，致力于打造人类命运共同体。长期以来，中国同国际社会一道，共同应对国际和地区安全风险、挑战、危机，作出了积极贡献。	
China follows a foreign policy of peace. We proposed and have taken the lead in practicing a new Asian approach of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and have worked all along to uphold, promote and contribute to international and regional security. China is firmly committed to pursuing the peaceful development path, maintaining the international order with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter at its core, fostering a new type of international relations of win-win cooperation, and building a community of shared future for all mankind. Over the years, China has worked together with the international community to tackle security risks, challenges and crises in the region and beyond, and have made positive contributions along the way.
世界关注亚洲，亚洲影响世界。当前，涉及亚洲安全形势的一些热点问题受到国际社会高度关注，中国为推动这些问题解决作出了积极努力。	
The world cares about Asia, and what happens in Asia impacts the whole world. Some security hotspots in Asia have recently caught the international limelight, and China has made great efforts towards their resolution.
今年年初以来，朝鲜半岛局势持续紧张。中国为管控形势、推动各方对话谈判付出巨大努力。我们坚持朝鲜半岛无核化，坚持维护半岛和平稳定，坚持通过对话协商解决问题。作为联合国安理会常任理事国，中国全面完整执行联合国安理会有关决议。作为半岛近邻，我们决不允许半岛生战生乱，一旦发生这样的情况对谁都没有好处。希望各方保持克制，不要相互刺激和激化矛盾，而是要共同努力，把半岛核问题早日拉回到对话谈判解决的轨道，推动实现东北亚长治久安。	
The situation on the Korean Peninsula has been tense since the beginning of the year. China has made huge efforts to manage the situation and push for dialogue and negotiation among various parties. We are committed to denuclearization, to peace and stability on the Peninsula, and to the resolution of issues through dialogue and consultation. As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has implemented relevant Security Council resolutions fully and faithfully. As a close neighbor, we will never allow war or chaos on the Peninsula, as this serves nobody's interests. We hope that various parties will exercise restraint, avoid mutual provocation and escalation of tension, make joint efforts to bring the nuclear issue back to the track of dialogue and negotiation as early as possible, and work toward peace and security in Northeast Asia.
阿富汗正处于关键转型期，面临多方面挑战，需要国际社会大力支持。中国积极参与阿富汗问题伊斯坦布尔进程，支持阿富汗和平重建，支持“阿人主导，阿人所有”的包容性政治和解进程。中国真诚希望阿富汗早日实现和平、稳定、发展，愿同国际社会一道，继续为阿富汗和平重建、政治和解、顺利转型提供支持和帮助。	
Afghanistan is undergoing a crucial phase of transition. Confronted with challenges on multiple fronts, it needs strong support of the international community. China has taken an active part in the Istanbul Process on Afghanistan, and worked hard to support peaceful reconstruction as well as the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process of inclusive political reconciliation. We sincerely hope to see an early restoration of peace, stability and development in Afghanistan. We will, together with the international community, continue to support peace and reconstruction, political reconciliation and smooth transition in Afghanistan.
叙利亚、巴以等问题早日解决既符合当事各方利益，也是国际社会共同期盼。中国历来主张通过政治谈判推动有关问题和平解决，一直以各种方式积极劝和促谈，并将会继续为此作出努力。中国为伊朗核问题全面协议的达成发挥了建设性作用，愿同各方一道，继续推动全面协议的后续执行。	
An early settlement of the Syrian issue and Palestine-Israel issue serves the interests of parties concerned and represents the common aspiration of the international community. China has always called for the peaceful settlement of relevant issues through political negotiations, actively promoted talks and reconciliation through various means, and will continue to make efforts in this direction. China played a constructive role in the conclusion of the comprehensive agreement of the Iranian nuclear issue. We will work with other parties to ensure continuous progress in its implementation.
一段时间以来，各方都很关心南海问题。我想强调，中国一贯致力于维护南海地区和平稳定，坚定维护自身在南海的主权和相关权利，坚持通过同直接当事国友好协商谈判和平解决争议。中方愿同东盟国家一道努力，将南海建设成为和平之海、友谊之海、合作之海。
For some time, developments in the South China Sea have attracted extensive attention. Let me stress that China is committed to maintaining peace and stability in the South China Sea. We firmly stand by our sovereignty and rights and interests in the South China Sea, and remain committed to resolving disputes peacefully through friendly consultation and negotiation with countries directly concerned. We will continue to work with ASEAN countries to make the South China Sea a sea of peace, friendship and cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
自2014年接任亚信主席国以来，中国认真履行职责，推进亚信各领域对话合作，取得积极成果。未来两年，中国将连任主席国，愿同各方一道推动亚信在地区安全和发展事务中发挥更大作用。在此，我谨对各方对中方主席国工作的大力支持和配合，表示衷心的感谢！
Since taking over the CICA presidency in 2014, China has earnestly performed its duties and endeavored to advance fruitful dialogue and cooperation across the board. In the next two years of our new term, we will work with other parties to raise CICA's profile in regional security and development affairs. Here, I would like to express heartfelt thanks to all of you for your great support for China's presidency.
当前，中国人民正在为实现全面建成小康社会奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而团结奋斗。中国发展将继续为各国创造更多机遇、给各国民众带来更多福祉。中国人民将在追求中国梦的过程中帮助和支持各国人民实现各自的美好梦想，一道实现持久和平、共同繁荣的亚洲梦，共创亚洲美好未来！	
The Chinese people are making united efforts to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects and fulfill the Chinese dream of great renewal of the Chinese nation. China's development will bring more opportunities and benefits to all countries and peoples. While pursuing the Chinese dream, the Chinese people will support people from other countries in realizing their own dreams, so that together, we will make the Asian dream of enduring peace and common prosperity come true and open up a great future for Asia.
最后，预祝本次会议取得圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish this meeting a complete success.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
89. 习近平在亚投行开业仪式上的讲话
尊敬的各代表团团长，
Honorable Heads of Delegations,
各位部长，
Honorable Ministers,
各位嘉宾，
Distinguished Guests,
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Ladies and Gentlemen,Dear Friends,
这是见证历史的时刻！57个国家的代表相聚北京，举行亚洲基础设施投资银行开业仪式暨理事会和董事会成立大会。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对远道而来的各位嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！对亚投行开业，表示衷心的祝贺！对各方积极支持和参与亚投行筹建，表示诚挚的感谢！
Now is a moment that will be recorded in history. Today, representatives from 57 countries are gathered in Beijing for the opening of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank -- the AIIB, and the inaugural ceremony of the AIIB Board of Governors and Board of Directors. On behalf of the Chinese government and people and also in my own name, let me extend warm welcome to all guests present. I want to congratulate the AIIB on its opening and give my heartfelt thanks to all parties for their support and dedication to the founding of the AIIB.
2013年10月，中国提出筹建亚投行的倡议，今天亚投行正式开业了。在短短两年多时间里，我们共同走过了一段不平凡的历程。
The initiative to set up the AIIB was put forward by China in October 2013. For over two years since then, we have together traveled an extraordinary journey that has taken us to the inauguration of the AIIB today.
2014年10月，首批22个意向创始成员国代表签署了《筹建亚洲基础设施投资银行备忘录》。2015年6月，50个意向创始成员国代表共同签署《亚洲基础设施投资银行协定》，另外7个国家随后在年底前先后签署。2015年12月，《亚洲基础设施投资银行协定》达到法定生效条件，亚投行正式宣告成立。
In October 2014, the first group of 22 Prospective Founding Members signed the Memorandum of Understanding on Establishing the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. In June 2015, representatives from 50 Prospective Founding Members signed the Articles of Agreement of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank. Before the end of last year, seven other Prospective Founding Members left their signatures on the Agreement. In December 2015, the Agreement met the legal threshold for entry into force and the AIIB was thence officially founded.
这些进展和成果的取得，得益于各成员国精诚合作和大力支持。各成员国表现了开放包容的合作姿态、共谋发展的务实行动、规范高效的专业精神。各成员国在协定谈判、政策制定、高管遴选等方面秉持合作精神，促成在关键问题上及早达成共识。各成员国加快国内签署和批准进程，共同推动协定如期生效，充分体现了对成立亚投行的承诺和支持。各成员国遵循多边程序，协力推进各项筹建议程，使亚投行在治理结构、业务政策、保障和采购政策、人力资源管理等方面都体现出国际性、规范性、高标准。
We owe the above-mentioned progress and achievements to the strong dedication and collaboration of all AIIB members, who have impressed us with their open mind for inclusiveness, their determination to seek practical results through common development, as well as their crave for professional excellence as seen in the high standard and efficient operation of the AIIB. Member states demonstrated a strong cooperative spirit throughout the negotiation, policy-making and senior management selection processes. This has made it possible for us to reach early agreement on key issues regarding the AIIB. Member states were quick in completing the domestic signing and ratification process, thus allowing the Agreement to enter into force as scheduled. This gives full expression to member states' commitment and support for the AIIB to come into being. In the course leading up to the founding of the AIIB, member states acted in strict compliance with multilateral procedures, making sure that the AIIB becomes a truly international, rule-based and high-standard institution in all aspects involving its governance structure, operation policy, safeguards and procurement policy and human resources management.
亚投行的成立，说明了一个道理：有志者事竟成。我们相信，面对人类和平与发展的繁重任务，只要国际社会坚定信心、增进共识、合作共赢，我们不仅能够想做事，而且一定能够做成事。
The founding of the AIIB proves once again that whenever there is a will, there will be a way. We are confident that when faced with the task of advancing world peace and development, so long as the international community has the will for consensus building and for win-win progress, we will be able to not only draw the big plan, but also turn it into reality.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
亚投行正式成立并开业，将有效增加亚洲地区基础设施投资，多渠道动员各种资源特别是私营部门资金投入基础设施建设领域，推动区域互联互通和经济一体化进程，也有利于改善亚洲发展中成员国的投资环境，创造就业机会，提升中长期发展潜力，对亚洲乃至世界经济增长带来积极提振作用。
The founding and opening of the AIIB will effectively boost investment to support infrastructure development in Asia. It will serve to channel more resources, particularly private investment, into infrastructure projects to promote regional connectivity and economic integration. It will bring along a better investment environment and more job opportunities and trigger greater medium- to long-term development potential on the part of developing members in Asia. This, in turn, will give impetus to economic growth in Asia and the wider world.
亚投行正式成立并开业，对全球经济治理体系改革完善具有重大意义，顺应了世界经济格局调整演变的趋势，有助于推动全球经济治理体系朝着更加公正合理有效的方向发展。
The founding and opening of the AIIB also means a great deal to the reform of the global economic governance system. It is consistent with the evolving trend of the global economic landscape and will help make the global economic governance system more just, equitable and effective.
我们期待，各成员国秉持团结合作精神，积极加大投入，推动亚投行尽早开展业务，尽快做大做强，壮大多边开发银行整体力量，为国际发展事业作出更大贡献。
It is our hope that member states will continue to work with one heart and one mind, actively pitch in and get the operation of the AIIB running as soon as possible, so that the AIIB could grow fast and strong and add to the strength of multilateral development banks, thus contributing even more to global development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
亚投行应该奉行开放的区域主义，同现有多边开发银行相互补充，应该以其优势和特色给现有多边体系增添新活力，促进多边机构共同发展，努力成为一个互利共赢和专业高效的基础设施投融资平台，在提高地区基础设施融资水平、促进地区经济社会发展中发挥应有作用。
The AIIB shall remain committed to open regionalism. The institution and existing multilateral development banks may complement each other for mutual strength. With its inherent advantages and unique features, the AIIB could make the current multilateral system more dynamic to facilitate common development of multilateral institutions. The AIIB could become a professional and efficient platform to promote infrastructure related investment and financing for the benefit of all sides. And the AIIB has a due role to play to raise the level of infrastructure financing and of economic and social development in the region.
亚洲基础设施融资需求巨大，是一片广阔的蓝海，新老机构互补空间巨大，可以通过开展联合融资、知识共享、能力建设等多种形式的合作和良性竞争，相互促进，取长补短，共同提高，提升多边开发机构对亚洲基础设施互联互通和经济可持续发展的贡献度。
The demand for infrastructure development in Asia is enormous. Institutions for infrastructure investment, old or new, have much to offer each other, and may well work together through joint financing, knowledge sharing and capacity building. They may engage each other in benign competition, learn from and reinforce each other, and move forward in tandem. This is a way to allow multilateral development institutions to contribute more to infrastructure connectivity and sustainable economic development in the region.
亚投行应该结合国际发展领域新趋势和发展中成员国多样化需求，创新业务模式和融资工具，帮助成员国开发更多高质量、低成本的基础设施项目。亚投行以发展中成员国为主体，同时包括大量发达成员国，这一独特优势使其能够成为推进南南合作和南北合作的桥梁和纽带。
The AIIB should adapt itself to new trends in international development and accommodate the diverse needs of developing members. It should explore new business models and financing tools, and help member states develop more infrastructure projects that are of higher quality and at lower costs. While developing countries make the mainstay of the AIIB membership, the institution also attracts a large number of developed members. Such a unique strength makes it a bridge and a bond to facilitate both South-South cooperation and North-South cooperation.
亚投行应该按照多边开发银行模式和原则运作，并充分借鉴现有多边开发银行在治理结构、环境和社会保障政策、采购政策、债务可持续性等方面好的经验和做法，取长补短，高起点运作。
The AIIB should function as a multilateral development bank as far as its operating model and principles are concerned. It should learn from the experience and best practices of existing multilateral development banks in terms of governance structure, environment and social benefits policies, procurement policy and debt sustainability. Mutual learning and sharing helps the AIIB function according to high standards.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中国是国际发展体系的积极参与者和受益者，也是建设性的贡献者。倡议成立亚投行，就是中国承担更多国际责任、推动完善现有国际经济体系、提供国际公共产品的建设性举动，有利于促进各方实现互利共赢。
China has taken an active part in, contributed a constructive part and benefited from the international development system. The initiative to establish the AIIB is a constructive move. It will enable China to undertake more international obligations, promote improvement of the current international economic system and provide more international public goods. This is a move that will help bring mutual benefits and win-win outcomes to all sides.
中国作为亚投行倡议方，在银行成立后，将坚定不移支持其运营和发展，除按期缴纳股本金之外，还将向银行即将设立的项目准备特别基金出资5000万美元，用于支持欠发达成员国开展基础设施项目准备。
China, as the initiator of the AIIB, will firmly support its operation and development. In addition to subscribing capital according to plan, China will contribute 50 million U.S. dollars to the project preparation special fund to be established soon, to support the preparation for infrastructure development projects in less developed member states.
2016年是中国“十三五”时期开局之年。中国将按照创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，着力推动创新驱动发展，增强经济发展新动力；着力推动供给侧结构性改革，适应和引领经济发展新常态；着力扩大对外开放，更加注重推进高水平双向开放。中国有信心、有能力保持经济持续健康发展，为亚洲和世界各国创造更多机遇、带来更多福祉。
The year 2016 is the first year of China's 13th five year plan. China will aspire to achieve innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. The focus of agenda will be on promoting innovation-driven development to strengthen new drivers for economic development, on promoting supply-side structural reform to adapt to and lead the new normal of economic development, and on opening wider to the outside world with more emphasis given to advancing high-level and two-way opening up. China has the confidence and capability to ensure sustained and sound economic development and bring more opportunities and benefits to Asia and beyond.
中国将始终做全球发展的贡献者，坚持奉行互利共赢的开放战略。中国开放的大门永远不会关上，欢迎各国搭乘中国发展的“顺风车”。中国愿意同各方一道，推动亚投行早日投入运营、发挥作用，为发展中国家经济增长和民生改善贡献力量。我们将继续欢迎包括亚投行在内的新老国际金融机构共同参与“一带一路”建设。
China will continue to contribute to global development and will continue to pursue an opening up strategy of mutual benefit. The door of China's opening up will never shut and China welcomes all countries to ride on its development. China stands ready to work with other parties to make sure that the AIIB will start to operate and play its due role as soon as possible and contribute to economic growth and better livelihood in developing countries. And China continues to welcome AIIB and other international financial institutions to take part in the building of the Silk Road Economic Belt and 21st Century Maritime Silk Road.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
众人拾柴火焰高。亚投行是各成员国的亚投行，是促进地区和世界共同发展的亚投行。亚投行要取得成功，需要各方团结协作、形成合力。
As the saying goes, the bonfire burns higher when everyone adds firewood to it. The AIIB belongs to all its member states. It is designed to facilitate common development in the region and the world at large. To succeed, it needs to count on the solidarity, cooperation and synergy of all sides.
我期待并坚信，通过各成员国携手努力，亚投行一定能成为专业、高效、廉洁的21世纪新型多边开发银行，成为构建人类命运共同体的新平台，为促进亚洲和世界发展繁荣作出新贡献！为改善全球经济治理增添新力量！
I hope and believe that through the joint efforts of all member states, the AIIB will become a new multilateral development bank for the 21st century that is professional, efficient and clean in operation. It will also be a new platform to help foster a community of shared future for mankind, to make new contribution to prosperity in Asia and beyond and lend new strength to improvement of global economic governance!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
87. 习近平在华盛顿核安全峰会上的讲话
加强国际核安全体系 推进全球核安全治理
——国家主席习近平在华盛顿核安全峰会上的讲话
（2016年4月1日，华盛顿）
Strengthen Global Nuclear Security Architecture and Promote Global Nuclear Security Governance
President Xi Jinping's remarks
 At the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington D.C.
Washington D.C., 1 April 2016
尊敬的奥巴马总统，
各位同事：	
President Obama,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴同大家聚首华盛顿，共商国际核安全大计。感谢奥巴马总统和美国政府所作的周到安排。	
It gives me great pleasure to join you in Washington D.C. for this important discussion on international nuclear security. I want to thank President Obama and the US government for the thoughtful arrangements.
60年前，人类和平利用核能事业起步，也从此迈开了加强核安全的步伐。60年来，在国际社会共同努力下，核安全理念深入人心，核安全合作硕果累累，各国核安全能力显著提高。	
Sixty years ago, humanity started the peaceful use of nuclear energy and embarked on a path to strengthen nuclear security. Over the past 60 years, thanks to the concerted efforts of the international community, the public awareness of nuclear security has been greatly enhanced, nuclear security cooperation has yielded fruitful results, and the nuclear security capability of countries has markedly improved.
始于2010年的核安全峰会，启动了国际核安全事业的助推器。6年一路走来，从确立共同目标，到制定工作重点，再到规划未来蓝图，我们一步一个脚印作出了自己的贡献。	
The Nuclear Security Summit process, which started in 2010, has provided a major boost to international nuclear security. Six years on, from developing common goals, establishing key priorities to mapping out the blueprint for the future, we have made our solid contribution to this great cause.
两年前，在荷兰海牙举行的第三届核安全峰会上，我提出应坚持理性、协调、并进的核安全观，将核安全进程纳入持续健康发展轨道。我高兴地看到，两年来全球核安全水平又有新的提高。	
Two years ago, at the Third Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague, I suggested that countries should follow a sensible, coordinated and balanced approach to nuclear security, and put it on the track of sound and sustainable development. I am pleased to note that new progress has been made in improving global nuclear security over the past two years.
但是，我们不能故步自封、裹足不前。环顾全球，世界格局正在经历前所未有的深刻演变，安全领域威胁和挑战层出不穷，产生恐怖主义的根源远未消除，核恐怖主义仍然是对国际安全的重大威胁。	
That being said, we have no reason to be self-complacent and slacken our efforts. Looking around the world, the global landscape is going through profound changes unseen in the past. New threats and challenges keep emerging in the security field. The root causes of terrorism are far from being removed. Nuclear terrorism remains a grave threat to international security.
展望未来，加强国际核安全体系，是核能事业健康发展的基本前提，更是推进全球安全治理、构建新型国际关系、完善世界秩序的重要环节。核安全峰会虽然将落下帷幕，但我们的新征程才刚刚开始。	
Looking ahead, a more robust global nuclear security architecture is the prerequisite for the sound development of nuclear energy. It is also an important step for promoting global security governance, building a new type of international relations and improving world order. The conclusion of the Nuclear Security Summit will not be the end of our endeavor, rather it will be the beginning of a new journey.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
我在海牙峰会上主张构建一个公平、合作、共赢的国际核安全体系。以公平原则固本强基，以合作手段驱动发展，以共赢前景坚定信心，为核能安全造福人类提供强有力、可持续的制度保障。为实现这一远大目标，我们要携手共进，作出新的努力。	
At the Summit in The Hague, I called for the building of a global nuclear security architecture featuring fairness and win-win cooperation. The principle of fairness secures a strong foundation, a cooperative approach generates momentum for development, while a win-win prospect gives us greater confidence. Together, they will provide strong and sustainable institutional guarantee for mankind to benefit from nuclear energy with security. We should work together and make fresh efforts to realize this grand objective.
——强化政治投入，把握标本兼治方向。作为国家领导人，我们有责任使核安全得到充分重视，有必要对国际反核恐怖主义形势进行经常性审议。要凝聚加强核安全的国际共识，对核恐怖主义零容忍、无差别，推动全面落实核安全法律义务及政治承诺，有效应对新挑战新威胁。	
-- Stepping up political input and sticking to the direction of addressing both symptoms and root causes. As national leaders, we have the responsibility to ensure that nuclear security gets adequate attention, and it is necessary to assess the international nuclear terrorism situation on a regular basis. We must build international consensus on enhanced nuclear security, have zero-tolerance for nuclear terrorism with no discrimination, push for the full implementation of the legal obligations and political commitments on nuclear security, and give an effective response to new challenges and threats.
求木之长者，必固其根本。寻求治本之道，始终是我们的目标。我们要铭记全人类福祉，构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，坚定推进全球安全治理，维护和平稳定的国际环境，促进各国普遍发展繁荣，开展和而不同、兼收并蓄的文明交流。惟其如此，才能早日铲除滋生核恐怖主义的土壤。	
As a Chinese saying goes, for a tree to grow tall, it needs to have deep roots. And we have always wanted to find a solution that addresses the root cause of the problem. We must bear in mind the well-being of humanity, build a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation, steadfastly advance global security governance, uphold a peaceful and stable international environment, promote common development and prosperity of all countries, and facilitate mutual learning and exchanges between different civilizations. Only in this way can we remove the breeding ground of nuclear terrorism at an early date.
——强化国家责任，构筑严密持久防线。发展核能是各国自主选择，确保核安全是各国应尽之责。我们要结合国情，从国家层面部署实施核安全战略，制定中长期核安全发展规划，完善核安全立法和监管机制，并确保相关工作得到足够投入和支持。	
-- Stepping up national responsibility and tightening up a line of defense that is sustainable. Just as a country makes its own choice to develop nuclear energy, it bears unshirkable responsibility to ensure nuclear security. Taking into account national conditions,we must,at the national level,plan and implement nuclear security strategy, formulate mid-and-long term development plans for nuclear security,improve nuclear security legislation and monitoring mechanism, and ensure that relevant work receives sufficient input and support.
战略布局离不开实际举措支撑。核恐怖主义威胁非对称性和不确定性突出，日常预防和危机应对要双管齐下。一方面，要做到见之于未萌、治之于未乱，筑牢基本防线，排除恐怖分子利用国际网络和金融系统兴风作浪等新风险。另一方面，要制定全方位、分阶段的危机应对预案，准确评估风险，果断处置事态，及时掌控局势。	
Strategic layout will get nowhere without support of concrete measures. The threat posed by nuclear terrorism is highly asymmetrical and unpredictable. Day-to-day prevention and crisis response must go together. It is important to detect and nip such threats in the bud before they become real and turn into crisis, build a basic line of defense, and prevent new risks whereby terrorists manipulate international network and financial system to stir up trouble. Moreover, it is important to work out crisis response plan which is comprehensive and stage-specific, accurately assess risks, decisively handle incidents, and timely put the situation under control.
——强化国际合作，推动协调并进势头。核恐怖主义是全人类的公敌，核安全事件的影响超越国界。在互联互通时代，没有哪个国家能够独自应对，也没有哪个国家可以置身事外。在尊重各国主权的前提下，所有国家都要参与到核安全事务中来，以开放包容的精神，努力打造核安全命运共同体。	
-- Stepping up international cooperation and enhancing the momentum of coordination for common progress. Nuclear terrorism is the common enemy of all mankind. Nuclear security incidents will have impacts that go beyond national borders. In the age of connectivity, no country can deal with such problems alone, and no country can stay immune from their impacts. Under the precondition of respect for national sovereignty, all countries should participate in nuclear security affairs, and adopt an open and inclusive spirit to forge a community of shared future on nuclear security.
现有国际组织和机制可作为未来核安全国际合作的坚实平台。我们要以国际原子能机构为核心，协调、整合全球核安全资源，并利用其专业特长服务各国。联合国作为最具普遍性的国际组织，可继续发挥重要作用。其他组织和机制也可以提供有益补充，促进执法等领域务实合作。在此过程中，要照顾广大发展中国家合理诉求，向他们提供援助。	
Existing international organizations and mechanisms can serve as solid platforms for international cooperation on nuclear security in the future. The IAEA can play a central role to coordinate and consolidate global resources for nuclear security, and use its professional expertise to serve all countries. As the most universal international organization, the United Nations can continue to play an important role. Other organizations and mechanisms can also play a useful,complementary role and promote practical cooperation in law-enforcement and other fields. In this process, it is necessary to accommodate the legitimate demand of developing countries and provide them with assistance.
——强化核安全文化，营造共建共享氛围。加强国际核安全体系，人的因素最为重要。法治意识、忧患意识、自律意识、协作意识是核安全文化的核心，要贯穿到每位从业人员的思想和行动中，使他们知其责、尽其职。	
-- Stepping up the culture of nuclear security and creating an atmosphere of joint efforts and shared benefits. The human factor is the most important element in the strengthening of global nuclear security architecture. The awareness of the rule of law, the sense of urgency, and the spirit of self-discipline and coordination are central to the nuclear security culture. As such, every one working in this field must follow their guidance in thinking and action so that they will readily understand their responsibilities and fulfill their duties.
学术界和公众树立核安全意识同样重要。我们要鼓励各国智库密切关注国际反核恐怖主义形势，积极开展核安全学术研究，并就加强国际核安全体系、促进各国核安全工作提出更多有价值的建议。我们还要做好核安全知识普及，增进公众对核安全的理解和重视。	
It is equally important that the academic community and the general public also foster the awareness of nuclear security. We must encourage think tanks of all countries to closely follow the developments of international efforts against nuclear terrorism, actively carry out studies in nuclear security and put forth more valuable recommendations on work to strengthen global nuclear security architecture and enhance all countries' nuclear security. In addition, we must do a good job to spread the knowledge of nuclear security and increase the public understanding of and attention to nuclear security.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
作为最大的发展中国家，中国始终在确保安全的前提下，致力于开发利用核能，弥补能源需求缺口，应对气候变化挑战。中国是核电发展最快的国家，同时保持着良好核安全纪录。海牙峰会以来，中国在核安全领域又取得了新进展。	
As the largest developing country, China has always been committed to development and utilization of nuclear energy while ensuring security in the first place. This is to bridge the gap in energy supply, and address the challenges posed by climate change. China is the country with the fastest growth of nuclear power. At the same time, it has kept a good record of nuclear security. Since the Summit in The Hague, China has made new progress in the field of nuclear security.
——中国奉行精益求精的理念，努力探索加强核安全的有效途径。我们已经将核安全纳入国家总体安全体系，写入国家安全法，明确了对核安全的战略定位。我们不断完善核安全国家法律框架，正在研究颁布原子能法、核安全法。我们制定实施了核安全中长期工作规划，不断健全监管和执法机制，全面开展从业人员能力建设，组织各类型模拟演练，提高应急响应能力。	
-- In pursuit of excellence through constant improvement, China has strived to explore effective ways to strengthen nuclear security. We have already incorporated nuclear security in China's national security system, written it into the National Security Law and defined its strategic nature. We are constantly improving the national legal framework concerning nuclear security and studying the promulgation of law on atomic energy and law on nuclear security. We have formulated and implemented the mid-to-long term work plan on nuclear security, and we are making efforts to improve monitoring and law-enforcement mechanisms,carry out capacity building for all personnel in this industry and organize various kinds of mock exercises to raise the ability of emergency response.
——中国坚持言出必行的原则，忠实履行国际义务和政治承诺。中国已经批准核安全领域所有国际法律文书，一贯严格执行安理会相关决议，积极支持和参与核安全国际倡议。海牙峰会上，我承诺的国家核安全示范中心已经提前一年竣工并在北京投入运营；中国原子能科学研究院高浓铀微堆已经顺利完成改造，开始使用更为安全的低浓铀燃料；中国协助加纳改造其高浓铀微堆的项目也取得了积极进展。	
-- Keeping its promise on nuclear security, China has fulfilled its international obligations and political commitment. China has ratified all the international legal instruments in the field of nuclear security, consistently and strictly implemented related Security Council resolutions, and actively supported and participated in international initiatives on nuclear security. The Center of Excellence on Nuclear Security I promised at the Summit in The Hague has been completed a year ahead of schedule and is now operational in Beijing; the HEU-fueled Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR) of the China Institute of Atomic Energy has been smoothly converted to start using safer LEU fuels; and positive progress has been made in the Chinese-assisted program to convert a HEU-fueled research reactor in Ghana.
——中国心怀合作共赢的愿景，积极推动国际交流合作。中国坚定支持国际原子能机构执行核安全行动计划，逐步增加向核安全基金的捐款。中国和国际原子能机构已经商定，将于今年正式启动实施首次实物保护咨询服务。今年2月，中国和美国成功举行了首次年度核安全对话。我们也将深化同其他国家以及联合国、打击核恐怖主义全球倡议等的交流合作。	
-- Aspiring for win-win cooperation, China is vigorously promoting international exchanges and cooperation. China firmly supports the IAEA in implementing the Action Plan on Nuclear Safety and will increase donations to the Nuclear Security Fund. China and the IAEA have agreed to officially start implementing the first International Physical Protection Advisory Service this year. This February, China and the US successfully held the first annual Nuclear Security Dialogue. We will also deepen our exchanges and cooperation with other countries, the UN and the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.
中国将继续加强本国核安全，同时将积极推进核安全国际合作，分享技术和经验，贡献资源和平台。我宣布：	
While stepping up its own nuclear security, China will actively advance related international cooperation, share its technologies and expertise and contribute resources and platforms. I hereby announce:
第一，中国将构建核安全能力建设网络。我们将利用国家核安全示范中心、中国海关辐射探测培训中心等现有平台，开展核安全从业人员培训、核安全技术演练和交流等活动。我们欢迎亚太国家、“一带一路”沿线国家和其他发展中国家参与相关项目，并将同国际原子能机构等保持紧密合作。	
First, China will build a network for capacity building on nuclear security. We will use existing platforms including the Center of Excellence on Nuclear Security and the China Customs Radiation Detection Training Center to carry out training of nuclear security professionals, exercises and exchanges regarding nuclear security technologies and other activities. We welcome the participation of Asia Pacific countries, countries along the Belt and Road and other developing countries in relevant projects and will stay in close cooperation with the IAEA.
第二，中国将推广减少高浓铀合作模式。我们支持各国根据本国需要，在经济和技术条件可行的情况下，尽量减少使用高浓铀。我们愿在“加纳模式”基础上，本着自愿务实的原则，协助有关国家改造从中国进口的高浓铀微堆。我们还将总结改造高浓铀微堆的多方合作模式，供其他有兴趣的国家参考。	
Second, China will promote cooperation model for less use of HEU. We support all countries in minimizing the use of HEU according to their needs as long as it is economically and technologically viable. We are willing to build on the Ghana model and help countries convert HEU-fueled MNSR imported from China under the principle of voluntarism and pragmatism. We will present to other interested countries the multi-party cooperation model for converting HEU-fueled MNSR for their reference.
第三，中国将实施加强放射源安全行动计划。为防止各国数量庞大的放射源被恐怖分子觊觎，我们将在未来5年内，进一步梳理境内放射源情况，健全安保制度，重点实现对高风险移动放射源的实时监控。我们愿同其他国家分享经验，共同提高放射源安全监管水平。
Third, China will implement the action plan on strengthening security of radioactive sources. To prevent the large amount of radioactive sources from falling into the hands of terrorists, we will, in the coming five years, review the radioactive sources within China, improve the security system and give priority to conducting real-time monitoring of high-risk mobile radioactive sources. We stand ready to share our experience with other countries and work with them to enhance the security monitoring of radioactive sources.
第四，中国将启动应对核恐怖危机技术支持倡议。我们将同有意愿的国家和组织一道，开展民用核材料分析、溯源等领域的科学研究，积极组织模拟演练，共同提升危机应对能力。	
Fourth, China will launch the technological support initiative against crisis of nuclear terrorism. We will, together with like-minded countries and organizations, carry out scientific research in the fields of civilian nuclear material analysis and tracing, actively organize mock exercises and jointly enhance our capacity for addressing crisis.
第五，中国将推广国家核电安全监管体系。中国实施最严格的安全监管，确保中国境内和对外出口的核电站安全可靠、万无一失。我们将依托国家核与辐射安全监管技术研发中心，帮助有需要的国家提升安全监管能力，为提高全球核电安全水平作出贡献。	
Fifth, China will promote its national security monitoring system for nuclear power. China applies the most stringent security monitoring to ensure the safety and security of the nuclear power stations within China and those exported to other parts of the world. Nothing is left to chance. Relying on the National Research and Development Center for Nuclear and Radiation Safety and Security Monitoring Technologies, we will help others enhance their capacity in security monitoring and contribute our share to enhancing nuclear power safety and security worldwide.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
春生夏长，秋收冬藏。有耕耘必有收获。只要我们精诚合作，持续加强核安全，核能造福人类的前景必将更加光明！	
What we plant in spring will blossom in summer, come to fruition in autumn and sustain us throughout the winter. The more we plough, the more we will gain. As long as we cooperate in good faith and continue to step up nuclear security, nuclear energy will certainly deliver a brighter future to mankind.
85. 习近平在第八轮中美战略与经济对话和第七轮中美人文交流高层磋商联合开幕式上的讲话
为构建中美新型大国关系而不懈努力
——在第八轮中美战略与经济对话和第七轮中美人文交流高层磋商联合开幕式上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
（2016年6月6日，北京）
Making Unremitting Efforts for a New Model of Major-Country Relationship Between China and the United States
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Joint Opening Ceremony of
The Eighth Round of the China-US Strategic and Economic Dialogue and the Seventh Round of the China-US High-level Consultation on People-to-People Exchange
Beijing, 6 June 2016
克里国务卿，　　
雅各布·卢财长，　　
各位来宾，　　
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Secretary of State John Kerry,
Secretary of the Treasury Jacob Lew,
Distinguished Guests,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今天，第八轮中美战略与经济对话和第七轮中美人文交流高层磋商在北京举行。首先，我对对话和磋商的开幕，表示衷心的祝贺！对远道而来的美国朋友，表示热烈的欢迎！	
Today, the eighth round of the China-US Strategic and Economic Dialogue (S&ED) and the seventh round of the China-US High-level Consultation on People-to-People Exchange (CPE) are held here in Beijing. Let me begin by extending hearty congratulations on the opening of the S&ED and the CPE and a big welcome to American friends who have traveled all the way to China.
3年前的这个时节，我同奥巴马总统在安纳伯格庄园举行会晤，双方同意加强战略沟通，拓展务实合作，妥善管控分歧，努力构建中美新型大国关系。	
Almost around this time three years ago, President Obama and I met at the Annenberg Estate where agreement was reached for the two sides to step up strategic communication, expand practical cooperation, properly manage differences and work vigorously to build a new model of major-country relationship between China and the United States.
一分耕耘，一分收获。3年耕耘，我们有了不少收获。在双方努力下，中美两国在双边、地区、全球层面众多领域开展合作，推动两国关系发展取得新成果。两国贸易额和双向投资达到历史新高，人文和地方交流更加密切，网络、执法等领域合作和两军交往取得新进展。两国发表了3个气候变化联合声明，同国际社会一道推动达成具有历史意义的《巴黎协定》。两国在朝鲜半岛核、伊朗核、阿富汗、叙利亚等热点问题上也保持了有效沟通和协调。这些合作给中美双方带来了实实在在的利益，也有力促进了亚太地区及世界和平、稳定、发展。	
Hard work pays off, and our efforts over the past three years have come to fruition. Thanks to our concerted efforts, our two countries have cooperated at the bilateral, regional and global levels in a wide range of areas, registering new progress in our relations. We witnessed record highs in trade and two-way investment, enjoyed closer people-to-people and sub-national exchanges, and made new headway in cooperation in cyberspace, law enforcement and military-to-military exchanges. We issued three joint statements on climate change, and worked together with other countries for the conclusion of the historic Paris Agreement. We maintained effective communication and coordination on hotspot issues like the Korean nuclear issue, the Iranian nuclear issue, and Afghanistan and Syria. Such cooperation has brought tangible benefits to both countries and given a strong boost to peace, stability and development of the Asia-Pacific and beyond.
3年的成果来之不易，也给了我们很多启示，最根本的一条就是双方要坚持不冲突不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢的原则，坚定不移推进中美新型大国关系建设。这个选择符合中美两国人民根本利益，也是各国人民普遍愿望。无论国际风云如何变幻，我们都应该坚持这个大方向，毫不动摇为之努力。	
What we achieved over the past three years has not come by easily, and could well serve as guide for the growth of China-US relations in the time to come. Most important, I believe, is that the two sides need to stay committed to the principles of non-confrontation, non-conflict, mutual respect and win-win cooperation, and work steadily toward this new model of major-country relations, for this is a choice that meets the fundamental interests of both the Chinese and American people as well as the wish of all people in the world. Whatever changes in the international landscape, we need to stay on track and work unswervingly toward this overarching goal.
现在，我们正处在一个快速发展变化的世界里。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化深入推进，各种挑战层出不穷，各国利益紧密相连。零和博弈、冲突对抗早已不合时宜，同舟共济、合作共赢成为时代要求。作为世界上最大的发展中国家、最大的发达国家和前两大经济体，中美两国更应该从两国人民和各国人民根本利益出发，勇于担当，朝着构建中美新型大国关系的方向奋力前行。	
We now live in a world of rapid development and changes. The move toward multi-polarity, the increasing trend of globalization, and the quick application of information technologies have all been accompanied by growing challenges of various sorts, and have brought countries even closer than ever before. It is a time when ideas of zero-sum game and conflicts and confrontation must give way to common development and win-win cooperation. It thus falls upon China and the US, the largest developing and developed country respectively, and the two largest economies in the world, to act in the fundamental interests of our people and people of the world, and move steadily forward along the path of building this new model of major-country relationship.
——我们要增强两国互信。中国人历来讲究“信”。2000多年前，孔子就说：“人而无信，不知其可也。”信任是人与人关系的基础、国与国交往的前提。我们要防止浮云遮眼，避免战略误判，就要通过经常性沟通，积累战略互信。这个问题解决好了，中美合作基础就会更加坚实，动力就会更加强劲。	
China and the US need to increase mutual trust. For the Chinese, trust is always something to be cherished. In the word of Confucius, who lived over 2,000 years ago, a man without trust can hardly accomplish anything. Trust stands as the basis of relationship among people, and provides a prerequisite for state-to-state exchanges. For China and the US, we need to maintain frequent communication and build up strategic mutual trust in order to avoid strategic misjudgment and prevent temporary problems from affecting our overall relations. With sufficient mutual trust, China-US cooperation will stand on a more solid basis and enjoy even more robust growth.
——我们要积极拓展两国互利合作。建交37年来，中美合作内涵和外延不断扩大，两国人民从中受益。要秉持共赢理念，不断提高合作水平。当前，要着力加强宏观经济政策协调，同有关各方一道推动二十国集团领导人杭州峰会取得积极成果，向国际社会传递信心，为世界经济注入动力。要全力争取早日达成互利共赢的中美投资协定，打造经贸合作新亮点。要深化两国在气候变化、发展、网络、反恐、防扩散、两军、执法等领域交流合作，加强双方在重大国际和地区以及全球性问题上的沟通和协调，给两国人民带来更多实际利益，为世界和平、稳定、繁荣提供更多公共产品。	
China and the US need to expand mutually-beneficial cooperation. Over the past 37 years since the establishment of diplomatic ties, China-US cooperation has grown steadily in both width and depth, bringing real benefits to our people. We need to embrace a win-win perspective and move our cooperation to a higher level. It is imperative that we increase macro-economic policy coordination and work together with other parties concerned to ensure that the G20 Hangzhou Summit delivers positive outcomes to boost confidence and invigorate global growth. It is important that we do our best to conclude a mutually-beneficial bilateral investment treaty at the earliest possible date to foster a new highlight in business and trade cooperation. And it is important that we deepen exchange and cooperation in climate change, development, cyber issues, counter-terrorism, non-proliferation, military-to-military relations and law enforcement, and step up communication and coordination on major international and regional issues as well as issues of global significance. This way, we could bring more real benefits to our people and provide more public goods for greater peace, stability and prosperity of the world.
——我们要妥善管控分歧和敏感问题。中美两国各具特色，历史、文化、社会制度、民众诉求等不尽相同，双方存在一些分歧是难以避免的。世界是多样的，没有分歧就没有世界。一个家庭里还经常有这样那样的分歧。有了分歧并不可怕，关键是不要把分歧当成采取对抗态度的理由。有些分歧是可以通过努力解决的，双方应该加把劲，把它们解决掉。有些分歧可能一时解决不了，双方应该多从对方的具体处境着想，以务实和建设性的态度加以管控。只要双方遵循相互尊重、平等相待原则，坚持求同存异、聚同化异，就没有过不去的坎，中美两国关系就能避免受到大的干扰。	
China and the US need to properly manage differences and sensitive issues. China and the US, each with its own uniqueness, are different in terms of history, culture, social system and people's aspiration. Differing views between us are hardly avoidable. In fact, in this world of diversity, differences among countries are just natural. Even family members do not always see eye to eye. One should not be afraid of differences. What is most important is to refrain from taking the differences as excuses for confrontation. There are differences that could be addressed by redoubling our efforts. For those differences that cannot be settled for the time being, we need to manage them in a pragmatic and constructive fashion by putting ourselves in each other's shoes. As long as we observe the principles of mutual respect and equality, shelve differences to seek consensus, and try to resolve them through expanding common ground, we will be able to overcome difficulties and obstacles, and prevent major disruptions in bilateral relations.
——我们要就亚太事务加强沟通和合作。宽广的太平洋不应该成为各国博弈的竞技场，而应该成为大家包容合作的大平台。中国奉行亲诚惠容的周边外交理念，始终致力于促进亚太和平、稳定、发展。中美在亚太地区拥有广泛共同利益，应该保持经常性对话，开展更多合作，应对各种挑战，努力培育两国共同而非排他的“朋友圈”，都做地区繁荣稳定的建设者和守护者。	
China and the US need to increase communication and cooperation over Asia-Pacific affairs. The vast Pacific should be a stage for inclusive cooperation, not an arena for competition. China pursues a neighborhood diplomacy of amity, sincerity, mutual benefit and inclusiveness, and is committed to advancing peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific region. The extensive common interests between China and the US in the Asia-Pacific make it possible for the two countries to keep frequent communication, have more cooperation, and jointly respond to challenges. The two countries may work together to foster a "circle of common friends" that is inclusive rather than exclusive, and both countries should play such a role that they will build and maintain prosperity and stability of this region.
——我们要厚植两国人民友谊。人民友好交往是国与国关系的源头活水。中美关系发展的基础是两国人民相互了解和友谊。我多次到访美国，无论是艾奥瓦州的老朋友，还是塔科马市林肯中学可爱的孩子们，对中国人民都抱有友好情谊，让我深受感动。我高兴地看到，去年两国人员往来近500万人次。双方要为两国各界交往搭建更多平台、提供更多便利，让中美友好薪火相传、生生不息。	
China and the US need to enhance friendship among the people. Friendship and exchange among the people provides constant driving force for growing bilateral relations. Mutual understanding and friendship of the peoples provides the basis for the growth of China-US relations. I visited the US many times. Be it my old friends in the State of Iowa, or the lovely children I met in the Lincoln High School of Tacoma, the American people have moved me deeply with their friendly sentiments towards the Chinese people. And I am glad to note that last year alone, some 5 million visits were made between the people of both sides. What we need to do is to build more platforms and keep facilitating these exchanges, so that the friendship between our people will go on from generation to generation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
今年是中国实施“十三五”规划开局之年。中国将贯彻全面建成小康社会、全面深化改革、全面依法治国、全面从严治党的战略布局，落实创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，着力推进供给侧结构性改革，推动转方式调结构，继续完善对外开放布局。我们对实现中国经济社会发展既定目标充满信心。中国将会为世界提供更多发展机遇，将会同包括美国在内的世界各国开展更密切的合作。	
This year marks the beginning of China's 13th Five-Year Plan. China will follow its strategic plan to build a society of moderate prosperity in all respects, and will comprehensively deepen reform, strengthen the rule of law, and enhance Party discipline. China's development will be guided by the principle of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. China will redouble efforts to promote supply-side structural reforms, shift growth model through restructuring, and achieve better opening-up. We are confident that the goals set for economic and social development will be met as planned. China's development will mean more opportunities for the world and China will have even closer cooperation with the US and other countries.
中国坚定不移走和平发展道路，倡导各国共同走和平发展道路，推动构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，打造人类命运共同体。我们愿同世界各国加强合作，共同维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序和国际体系，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展，让我们生活的这个星球更加美好。	
China is committed to the path of peaceful development. China calls on all countries to follow such a path and work to promote a new model of international relations featuring win-win cooperation, so as to foster a community of shared future for mankind. China will strengthen cooperation with other countries to jointly uphold the international order and system with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter at the core and make the existing international order more just and equitable. Working together, we can make the world a better place to live in.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
中美战略与经济对话和人文交流高层磋商机制为增进两国战略互信、拓展互利合作、加深两国人民友谊发挥了重要作用。我向双方工作团队，向所有关心、支持对话和磋商的两国各界人士，表示衷心的感谢！希望双方团队不负重托、再接再厉，在接下来的两天里深入沟通、积累共识，取得更多实际成果。	
The S&ED and the CPE have played a significant role in increasing strategic mutual trust, expanding mutually-beneficial cooperation, and deepening friendship among the people. I wish to express heartfelt appreciation to our teams and to people from all walks of life of the two sides who have taken a great interest in and acted to support the dialogues and consultations. I hope that in the following two days our teams will rise up to their responsibilities, make persistent efforts to build consensus and produce more deliverables in the talks.
中国宋代诗人辛弃疾有一句名句，叫作“青山遮不住，毕竟东流去”。意思是天下的大江大河千回百转，历经多少曲折，最终都会奔流到海。只要我们坚定方向、锲而不舍，就一定能推动中美新型大国关系建设得到更大发展，更好造福两国人民和各国人民。	
Xin Qiji, a poet in China's Song Dynasty, once wrote, "Thick mountains could not stop the river from flowing into the sea." In fact, all rivers have to travel a meandering course before reaching their destination. For China and the US, as long as we stay focused on our goal and persevere in our efforts, we will be able to make even greater progress in building the new model of major-country relationship and deliver greater benefits not just to the people of our two countries but to people of all countries in the world.
最后，祝本轮中美战略与经济对话和人文交流高层磋商取得圆满成功！	
To conclude, I wish this round of the China-US S&ED and CPE a complete success.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
66. 习近平主席在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十七次会议上的讲话
团结协作 开放包容
建设安全稳定、发展繁荣的共同家园
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十七次会议上的讲话
（2017年6月9日，阿斯塔纳）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Upholding Solidarity, Coordination, Openness and Inclusiveness
Building a Common Home of Security, Stability, Development and Prosperity
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 17th Meeting of Council of Heads of States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
Astana, 9 June 2017
尊敬的纳扎尔巴耶夫总统，
尊敬的各位同事：	
President Nazarbayev,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到阿斯塔纳出席上海合作组织峰会。这座城市展现的生机活力是本组织蓬勃发展的生动写照。	
I am very pleased to be here in Astana to attend the SCO Summit. The vibrancy that this city displays is also a vivid reflection of the robust growth of the SCO.
感谢东道主哈萨克斯坦和纳扎尔巴耶夫总统所作的精心准备和周到安排。一年来，哈方作为轮值主席国，做了大量卓有成效的工作，中方对此高度评价。	
I would like to thank the host country Kazakhstan and President Nazarbayev for the meticulous preparation and thoughtful arrangements. In the past year, Kazakhstan has done tremendous amount of effective work as the SCO President, which the Chinese side speaks highly of.
今年是《上海合作组织宪章》签署15周年，也是《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》签署10周年。以这两份纲领性文件为思想基石和行动指南，成员国坚定遵循“上海精神”，在构建命运共同体道路上迈出日益坚实步伐，树立了合作共赢的新型国际关系典范。今天，我们将接收印度、巴基斯坦为成员国。	
This year marks the 15th anniversary of the signing of the Charter of SCO as well as the 10th anniversary of the Treaty on Long-term Good Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation. The two documents lay down the principles and give guidance to SCO member states in their work. Firmly committed to the Shanghai Spirit, SCO member states are making solid progress on the road of building a community of shared future, thus establishing a fine example of the new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation. In this context, today we are going to admit India and Pakistan as new member states of the SCO.
当前，国际和地区形势深刻复杂变化，不稳定不确定因素增多。各国惟有同舟共济，才能妥善应对威胁和挑战。中方愿同各方一道，强化命运共同体意识，建设安全稳定、发展繁荣的共同家园。为此，我提出以下建议。	
At present, the international and regional situation is undergoing profound and complex changes. Destabilizing factors and uncertainties are on the rise. Only through cooperation can countries properly meet threats and challenges. China is willing to work together with all parties to strengthen the sense of community of shared future, and build a common home of security, stability, development and prosperity. To this end, I would like to propose the following.
第一，巩固团结协作。哈萨克斯坦有句谚语，“有团结的地方，定有幸福相随”。“上海精神”产生的强大凝聚力是本组织发展的保证。我们要保持团结协作的良好传统，新老成员国密切融合，深化政治互信，加大相互支持，构建平等相待、守望相助、休戚与共、安危共担的命运共同体。中方倡议制定《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》未来5年实施纲要，规划下一阶段各领域合作方向。建议加强立法机构、政党、司法等领域交流合作，为各方进行政策沟通提供渠道。	
First, strengthen solidarity and coordination. As a saying in Kazakhstan goes, where there is solidarity, happiness will follow. The Shanghai Spirit has inspired a strong sense of solidarity which ensures the growth of the SCO. We should carry forward this fine tradition of solidarity and coordination. All member states, old and new, should work in close coordination, deepen mutual trust and increase mutual support in their endeavor to build a community of shared future featuring equality, mutual support, solidarity and sharing of weal and woe. It is China's proposal for the SCO to draw up a 5-year outline for implementation of the Treaty on Long-term Good Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation. This will help set the direction for SCO cooperation in all fields in the next phase. It is suggested that exchange and cooperation between legislative bodies, political parties and in the judicial fields be increased so as to provide channels of policy communication for all parties.
第二，携手应对挑战。安全是发展的基石。没有安全，就谈不上发展。近期本地区发生的暴力恐怖事件表明，打击“三股势力”斗争仍然任重道远，我们要一如既往将维护地区安全稳定作为上海合作组织工作的优先方向。中方支持落实本次峰会将签署的《上海合作组织反极端主义公约》，有效遏制极端主义蔓延势头。为提升成员国在安全领域的协调水平和行动能力，中方主张加强地区反恐怖机构建设，严厉打击毒品制贩，愿再次主办上海合作组织网络反恐联合演习，倡议举办防务安全论坛，制定未来3年打击“三股势力”合作纲要。中方支持上海合作组织在国际和地区事务中发出一致声音，为推动热点问题政治解决贡献力量。中方对近期阿富汗安全形势恶化表示关切，呼吁各方支持阿富汗和平和解进程，期待“上海合作组织－阿富汗联络组”为阿富汗和平重建事业发挥更积极作用
Second, join hands to tackle challenges. Security is the prerequisite for development. Without security, there will be no development to speak of. Recent acts of terrorism in this region show that the fight against the three forces remains a long and arduous task. We should continue to give priority to the SCO's commitment to maintain regional security and stability. China supports the enforcement of the SCO Convention on Combating Extremism to be signed at the Summit. This will effectively contain the spread of extremism. To enhance the capacity of member states in coordination and implementation in the security field, China calls for the SCO to strengthen regional counter-terrorism institutional building and resolutely crack down on illicit drug manufacturing and trafficking. China is willing to host again the SCO joint counter-terrorism cyber exercise. China proposes to hold a defense security forum and formulate a three-year program of cooperation to fight the three forces. China supports the SCO in speaking with one voice on international and regional issues. The SCO can contribute to finding political settlement to hotspot issues. China is concerned with the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan recently, and calls upon all parties to support the country's peace and reconciliation process. We hope the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group will play an even more active role for Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction.
第三，深化务实合作。地区一体化和经济全球化是时代潮流，各国和各国人民应该从这一进程中受益。上个月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举行。中方和有关各方正积极推动“一带一路”建设同欧亚经济联盟建设等区域合作倡议以及哈萨克斯坦“光明之路”等各国发展战略对接，上海合作组织可以为此发挥重要平台作用。中方倡议逐步建立区域经济合作制度性安排，并从商签《上海合作组织贸易便利化协定》做起。为提高地区国家互联互通水平，中方支持按期开放《上海合作组织成员国政府间国际道路运输便利化协定》中规定的跨境线路，欢迎本地区其他国家加入协定，并赞同制定成员国公路协调发展规划。为调动更多资源和力量推动上海合作组织框架内务实合作，中方支持建立地方合作机制，并积极开展中小企业合作，倡议成立经济智库联盟和电子商务工商联盟。建议充分利用现有平台为本组织项目合作融资，同时在专家层面继续研究建立上海合作组织开发银行的可行方式。	
Third, deepen practical cooperation. Regional integration and economic globalization are the trends of our times, and it is important for them to bring benefits to all countries and peoples. Last month, the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation was successfully held in Beijing. China and the parties concerned are now actively exploring ways to synergize the Belt and Road Initiative with regional cooperation initiatives like the Eurasian Economic Union and national development strategies, including the "Nurly Zhol" of Kazakhstan. The SCO may well serve as an important platform for this endeavor. It is China's suggestion to gradually put in place institutional arrangements for regional economic cooperation, and we may begin with a SCO trade facilitation agreement. For greater connectivity between regional countries, China supports the opening of the cross-border routes on schedule as prescribed in the Agreement between the Governments of the Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization on Creating Favorable Conditions for International Road Transportation. China welcomes non-SCO countries in our region to join the Agreement, and endorses the formulation of a plan for coordinated development of roads among SCO member states. To mobilize more resources and driving force for practical cooperation under the SCO framework, China supports the establishment of a mechanism for sub-national cooperation and has vigorously promoted SME cooperation by its initiatives of economic think-tanks alliance and e-commerce alliance of the SCO. China suggests that we fully utilize the existing platforms to raise finance for SCO projects, while at the same time exploring at the expert level possible ways to establish the SCO development bank.
第四，拉紧人文纽带。我们要促进各国民众特别是青年一代心灵相通，使睦邻友好合作事业永葆活力。中方愿同各方一道，继续做好上海合作组织大学运行工作，办好青年交流营、中小学生夏令营等品牌项目，并主办上海合作组织国家文化艺术节、妇女论坛、职工技能大赛等活动，扎实推进卫生、救灾、环保、体育、旅游等领域合作。中方将启动实施“中国－上海合作组织人力资源开发合作计划”，通过邀请上海合作组织成员国人员来华研修研讨、派遣中方专家顾问赴成员国提供政策咨询、在成员国境内开展当地培训、提供政府奖学金名额等方式，加大同成员国在人力资源开发领域合作的广度和深度。促进民心相通，媒体不能缺位。中方倡议建立媒体合作机制，将主办本组织首届媒体峰会。	
Fourth, enhance people-to-people bonds. It is important for SCO countries to bring our people, youth in particular, closer to each other, so that the good-neighborliness and cooperation between us will be carried forward by the future generations. China is ready to work with other parties to ensure the success of the SCO University, as well as SCO's brand projects such as the youth exchange camp and the summer camp for elementary and middle-school students. China would like to host such SCO activities as the cultural and art festival, women's forum and skills contest of workers, and strive for solid progress of SCO cooperation in health, disaster relief, environment protection, sports and tourism. China will launch a "China-SCO cooperation program in human resources development", under which China will invite representatives from SCO states to seminars and workshops in China, send Chinese experts to SCO states to give policy advice, carry out local training programs in SCO states and provide government scholarships. With this, we hope to broaden and deepen China's cooperation with other SCO members in human resources development. Closer people-to-people ties would not be possible without the positive role of the media. Hence China suggests setting up a mechanism for media cooperation, and would like to host the first SCO media summit.
第五，坚持开放包容。对外开放是本组织成立之初就确立的基本原则。中方支持上海合作组织同观察员国、对话伙伴以及其他国家开展多形式、宽领域合作，并根据有关规定和协商一致原则继续认真研究有关国家获得本组织法律地位的申请。中方赞成本组织继续扩大同联合国等国际和地区组织的交流合作，共同致力于促进世界持久和平和共同繁荣的事业。	
Fifth, uphold openness and inclusiveness. Openness has been a defining feature of the SCO since its inception. China supports the SCO in carrying out cooperation of various forms and in a broad range of areas with its observer states and dialogue partners as well as other countries, and in further reviewing the applications from the related countries for legal status in the SCO in accordance with its regulations and the principle of consensus. China stands for more exchanges and cooperation between the SCO and the United Nations and other international and regional organizations, in a joint effort to promote lasting peace and shared prosperity in the world.
中方高度评价本组织两个常设机构的工作，决定向秘书处追加捐款1000万元人民币，用于改善工作条件和开展活动。	
China highly commends the work of the two permanent bodies of the SCO and will make an additional contribution of RMB10 million to the Secretariat for it to improve working conditions and undertake more activities.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
本次峰会后，中方将接任上海合作组织轮值主席国并于2018年6月举办峰会。中方将认真履职尽责，同各方一道，努力给各国人民带来越来越多的获得感，携手创造本组织更加光明的未来。	
After this summit, China will take over the rotating presidency of the SCO and host the next summit in June 2018. China will make best efforts to fulfill the task and work with all other parties to give our people a greater sense of ownership and usher in an even brighter future for the SCO.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
65. 习近平在G20汉堡峰会讲话全文
坚持开放包容 推动联动增长
Promoting Openness and Inclusiveness
To Achieve Interconnected Growth
——在二十国集团领导人汉堡峰会上关于世界经济形势的讲话
（2017年7月7日，汉堡）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Statement on the State of the Global Economy by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the G20 Hamburg Summit
Hamburg, 7 July 2017
尊敬的默克尔总理，
Chancellor Merkel,
各位同事：
Dear colleagues,
汉堡被誉为“世界桥城”。很高兴同大家在这里相聚，共商架设合作之桥、促进共同繁荣大计。首先，我谨对默克尔总理及德方的热情周到接待，表示衷心感谢。
It is a great pleasure to be with you in Hamburg, the City of Bridges, to discuss ways of building a bridge of cooperation to advance our shared prosperity. First of all, I express heartfelt appreciation to you, Chancellor Merkel, and the German government for your warm hospitality.
当前，世界经济出现向好势头，有关国际组织预计，今年世界经济有望增长3.5%。这是近年来最好的经济形势。有这样的局面，同二十国集团的努力分不开。同时，世界经济中的深层次问题尚未解决，仍然面临诸多不稳定不确定因素。
The global economy is showing signs of moving in the right direction. The related international organizations forecast that it will grow by 3.5 percent this year, the best performance that we have seen in several years. This would not be possible without the efforts of the G20. On the other hand, the global economy is still plagued by deep-seated problems and faces many uncertainties and destabilizing factors.
面对挑战，杭州峰会提出了二十国集团方案：建设创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济。汉堡峰会把“塑造联动世界”作为主题，同杭州峰会一脉相承。我们要共同努力，把这些理念化为行动。这里，我愿谈几点意见。
Facing such challenges, the G20 agreed in Hangzhou last year on the path forward: building an innovative, invigorated, interconnected and inclusive world economy. This year, building on the theme of the Hangzhou Summit, the Hamburg Summit has made "Shaping an Interconnected World" its theme. What we need to do now is to work together to translate our vision into action. With this in mind, I wish to state the following:
第一，我们要坚持建设开放型世界经济大方向。这是二十国集团应对国际金融危机的重要经验，也是推动世界经济增长的重要路径。国际组织当前调高世界经济增长预期，一个重要原因就是预计国际贸易增长2.4%、全球投资增加5%。我们要坚持走开放发展、互利共赢之路，共同做大世界经济的蛋糕。作为世界主要经济体，我们应该也能够发挥领导作用，支持多边贸易体制，按照共同制定的规则办事，通过协商为应对共同挑战找到共赢的解决方案。
Firstly, we should stay committed to building an open global economy. This commitment of the G20 to build open economies saw us through the global financial crisis, and this commitment is vital to reenergizing the global economy. Various international organizations have revised upward forecast for this year's global growth, mainly because of a projected 2.4 percent growth for global trade and 5 percent growth for global investment. We must remain committed to openness and mutual benefit for all so as to increase the size of the global economic "pie". As the world's major economies, we should and must lead the way, support the multilateral trading system, observe the jointly established rules and, through consultation, seek all-win solutions to common challenges we face.
第二，我们要共同为世界经济增长发掘新动力。这个动力首先来自创新。研究表明，全球95%的工商业同互联网密切相关，世界经济正在向数字化转型。我们要在数字经济和新工业革命领域加强合作，共同打造新技术、新产业、新模式、新产品。这个动力也来自更好解决发展问题，落实2030年可持续发展议程。这对发展中国家有利，也将为发达国家带来市场和投资机遇，大家都是赢家。杭州峰会就创新和发展达成重要共识，有关合作势头在德国年得以延续，下一步要不断走深、走实。
Secondly, we should foster new sources of growth for the global economy. Innovation, more than anything else, is such a new source of growth. Research shows that 95 percent of the world's businesses are now closely linked with the Internet, and the global economy is transitioning toward a digital economy. This means we should boost cooperation in digital economy and the new industrial revolution and jointly develop new technologies, new industries, new business models and new products. Another source of growth derives from making greater efforts to address the issue of development and implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and such efforts will both benefit developing countries and generate business and investment opportunities for developed countries. In other words, this will be a win-win game for all. At the Hangzhou Summit last year, we reached important consensus on innovation and development. This momentum of cooperation created has been sustained this year under the German chairmanship of G20. Going forward, we should see that more substantial and concrete outcomes are delivered.
第三，我们要携手使世界经济增长更加包容。当前，世界经济发展仍不平衡，技术进步对就业的挑战日益突出。世界经济论坛预计，到2020年，人工智能将取代全球逾500万个工作岗位。二十国集团的一项重要使命，就是本着杭州峰会确定的包容增长理念，处理好公平和效率、资本和劳动、技术和就业的矛盾。要继续把经济政策和社会政策有机结合起来，解决产业升级、知识和技能错配带来的挑战，使收入分配更加公平合理。二十国集团应该更加重视在教育培训、就业创业、分配机制上交流合作。这些工作做好了，也有利于经济全球化健康发展。
Thirdly, we should work together to achieve more inclusive global growth. Currently, global economic growth is not balanced, and technological advances work against job creation. According to the projection of the World Economic Forum, artificial intelligence will take away more than 5 million jobs in the world by 2020. The G20 has an important mission, which is to reaffirm the vision of pursuing inclusive growth agreed upon at the Hangzhou Summit last year, and strike a balance between fairness and efficiency, between capital and labor, and between technology and employment. To achieve this goal, we must ensure synergy between economic and social policies, address the mismatch between industrial upgrading and knowledge and skills, and ensure more equitable income distribution. The G20 needs to place more importance on cooperation in education, training, employment, business start-up and wealth distribution-related mechanisms, as progress on these fronts will make economic globalization work better.
第四，我们要继续完善全球经济治理。国际金融危机爆发以来，二十国集团在加强宏观政策协调、改革国际金融机构、完善国际金融监管、打击避税等方面取得积极成果，为稳定金融市场、促进经济复苏作出了重要贡献。下一步，我们要在上述领域继续努力，特别是要加强宏观政策沟通，防范金融市场风险，发展普惠金融、绿色金融，推动金融业更好服务实体经济发展。
Fourthly, we should continue improving global economic governance. In the wake of the global financial crisis, the G20 has done a lot to improve macroeconomic policy coordination, reform international financial institutions, tighten international financial regulation and combat tax avoidance, thus ensuring financial market stability and recovery. We should build on these achievements. In particular, we should strengthen coordination of macroeconomic policies, forestall risks in financial markets and develop financial inclusion and green finance to make the financial sector truly drive the development of the real economy.
不久前，中国成功举办“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。与会各方本着共商、共建、共享精神，在促进政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通上取得丰硕成果，努力打造治理新理念、合作新平台、发展新动力。这同二十国集团的宗旨高度契合。
China recently hosted a successful Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation. Acting in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, the forum participants achieved fruitful outcomes in terms of boosting the connectivity of policies, infrastructure, trade, finance and people. Guided by a new vision of governance, we built a new platform of cooperation to tap into new sources of growth. The commitment of the Belt and Road Forum is highly compatible with the goal of the G20.
德国谚语说，一个人的努力是加法，一个团队的努力是乘法。让我们携手合作，推动联动增长，促进共同繁荣，不断向着构建人类命运共同体的目标迈进！
A German saying goes to the effect that, "Those who work alone, add; those who work together, multiply." In this spirit, let us work together to promote interconnected growth for shared prosperity and build toward a global community with a shared future.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
59. 习近平在亚太经合组织第二十五次领导人非正式会议第一阶段会议上的讲话
携手谱写亚太合作共赢新篇章
——在亚太经合组织第二十五次领导人非正式会议第一阶段会议上的发言
（2017年11月11日，岘港）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Working Together for a New Chapter of
Win-Win Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Session I of the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting
Da Nang, 11 November 2017
尊敬的陈大光主席，
各位同事：	
President Tran Dai Quang,
Dear Colleagues,
感谢陈大光主席和越南政府为本次会议所作的周到安排。几天前，台风“达维”登陆越南，造成重大人员伤亡和财产损失。我谨代表中国政府和人民向灾区人民致以诚挚慰问。
I wish to thank President Tran Dai Quang and the Vietnamese government for their thoughtful arrangements. Vietnam was hit by Typhoon Damrey a few days ago, resulting in heavy casualties and economic losses. On behalf of the Chinese government and people, let me express my deep sympathy to those affected by the typhoon.
3年前的今天，我们在北京共商亚太合作大计。中国人常说，3年有成。3年来，世界经济逐步回暖，已呈现出国际金融危机发生以来较强的复苏势头，各方信心正在增强。
Three years ago on this day, we discussed in Beijing the blueprint for Asia-Pacific cooperation. The Chinese people believe that three years is a good time to take stock of what one has achieved. In the past three years, the world economy has gradually rebounded, showing strong momentum of recovery since the outbreak of the international financial crisis. People in all sectors are gaining more confidence.
察势者智，驭势者赢。我们要看到世界经济正在发生深层次重大变化。昨天，我在工商领导人峰会演讲中谈了看法。亚太各方应该因势利导，立足于行动，引领全球新一轮发展繁荣。	
Those who recognize the trend are wise and those who ride the trend will win. We need to take note of the profound changes taking place in the world economy. At yesterday's CEO Summit, I shared my thoughts on this subject. If Asia-Pacific economies seize the trend and take action, we can usher in a new round of development and prosperity for the world.
第一，坚持不懈推动创新，打造强劲发展动力。创新是撬动发展的第一杠杆。当前，新兴科技和产业革命加速兴起，创新发展面临难得历史机遇。我们要推动科技创新和制度创新两个轮子一起转，市场和技术和谐共振，让新技术、新业态、新模式不断开花结果，最大限度释放发展潜能。我们要用好亚太经合组织平台，深入落实今年制定的互联网和数字经济路线图。	
First, we need to promote innovation as a strong growth driver. Innovation is the most powerful lever for development. As new technologies emerge and the new industrial revolution gains momentum, we face a rare historic opportunity for innovation-driven development. We need to strive for both scientific and technological innovation and institutional innovation, build synergy between market and technology, and help bring to fruition new technologies, new business forms and models to fully unlock our development potential. This is why, in the context of APEC, we need to implement in real earnest the Roadmap on the Internet and Digital Economy we have drawn this year.
这些年，中国经济不断呈现新动能，关键就在于坚持走创新发展之路。30年前，中国第一封电子邮件从北京发出。目前，中国已拥有7.5亿网民，网络零售额年均增长30%，共享经济规模达3.5万亿元人民币，移动支付规模超过158万亿元人民币。事实证明，只要勇于探索，创新发展的道路就会越走越宽。	
Innovation has proven to be essential to the emergence of new drivers for the Chinese economy in recent years. Thirty years ago, China's first email was sent from Beijing. Today, China has 750 million Internet users, our on-line retail sales are growing by 30 percent a year, our "sharing economy" has reached 3.5 trillion yuan in size, and China's mobile payment transactions have exceeded 158 trillion yuan. This example shows that as long as we keep exploring, we will see more opportunities and successes of innovation-driven development.
第二，坚定不移扩大开放，创造广阔发展空间。历史告诉我们，关起门来搞建设不会成功，开放发展才是正途。我们应该不忘初心，深入推进贸易和投资自由化便利化，构建开放型经济，维护和加强多边贸易体制，引导经济全球化再平衡。要按照商定的路线图，坚定推进亚太自由贸易区建设，在开放中实现亚太新一轮大发展。	
Second, we need to open up our economies to create more space for development. History has taught us that closed-door development will get nowhere, while open development is the only right choice. We need to remain true to APEC's founding purpose: advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, build an open economy, uphold and strengthen the multilateral trading regime, and help rebalance economic globalization. We need to take determined steps toward a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific in line with the agreed roadmap, and herald a new round of development in the Asia-Pacific in the course of opening up.
明年是中国改革开放40周年。近40年来，中国坚持对外开放，在走向世界的过程中实现了自身跨越式发展。展望未来，中国开放的力度将更大，惠及世界的程度会更深。从明年起，我们将举办中国国际进口博览会，打造互利合作新平台。我相信，这将有利于各方更好分享中国发展红利。	
Next year will mark the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. In nearly four decades, China has opened its arms to embrace the world and achieved "leapfrog development" of itself in this process. Looking ahead, China will open still wider and its development will deliver even greater benefits to the rest of the world. Starting from next year, China will hold an International Import Expo. I am sure this new platform of mutually beneficial cooperation will help all parties to better share the opportunities of China's development.
第三，积极践行包容性发展，让民众有更多获得感。包容性不足是一个具有普遍性的问题。我们要把提升包容性置于更突出位置，处理好公平和效率、资本和劳动、技术和就业的关系，重视人工智能等新技术对就业的影响，让更多人共享发展成果。我们要落实好今年制定的包容行动议程文件，深化减贫、中小微企业、教育、反腐败、城镇化、妇女等领域合作，增进28亿亚太人民的福祉。	
Third, we need to pursue inclusive development to enhance our people's sense of fulfillment. Lack of inclusiveness in development is a problem facing many economies. We should redouble efforts to address this problem. To enable more people to share the benefits of development, efforts must be made to strike a better balance between fairness and efficiency, capital and labor, technology and employment. Greater attention must be paid to the impact of artificial intelligence and other technological advances on jobs. APEC members need to do a good job of implementing the Action Agenda on Inclusion formulated this year, and deepen cooperation on poverty reduction, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), education, fighting corruption, urbanization and women's empowerment. All this will contribute to the well-being of the 2.8 billion people in the Asia-Pacific region.
中国始终坚持就业优先，着力增强经济发展创造就业的能力，以创业带动就业，保障高校毕业生等重点群体就业，以教育培训提升劳动力素质，缓解结构性就业矛盾。过去几年，中国每年都实现了1300万以上城镇新增就业。我们得到的一点重要启示是，只要加强统筹，举措到位，就业不是经济结构调整必然付出的代价，稳住就业反而能够为改革发展提供充足的回旋空间。	
China gives high priority to employment. We have worked to ensure that economic development is pursued in a way that supports job creation, encouraged business start-ups as a means to create more jobs, and paid particular attention to the employment of college graduates and other key groups. We have also provided the labor force with better education and training to tackle structural unemployment. In each of the past few years, we have created over 13 million new jobs in cities and towns. An important thing we have learnt from all this is that with better coordination and the right measures, economic restructuring does not have to come at the expense of employment. On the contrary, stable employment would allow greater leeway for reform and development.
第四，不断丰富伙伴关系内涵，实现互利共赢。我们同属亚太，彼此息息相关，命运相连。要强化命运共同体意识，加强政策协调对接，形成合力。要秉持和而不同理念，促进优势互补、合作互惠、发展互鉴。要兼顾自身利益和他方利益，减少政策负面外溢效应。我们已经确定了亚太伙伴关系的方向和构架，要扎扎实实向前推进。	
Fourth, we need to enrich our partnerships and deliver benefits to all involved. As APEC economies, we have a stake in each other's success and our future is closely connected. With a shared future in mind, we need to develop a stronger sense of community, harmonize our policies and create synergy. We need to foster a spirit of harmony in diversity, draw on each other's strength, pursue mutually beneficial cooperation and draw on each other's best practice in development. We should consider the interests of others while pursuing those of our own, and reduce the adverse spillovers of our domestic policies. As we have agreed on the direction and framework of an Asia-Pacific partnership, it is time to take solid steps toward this goal.
基于共商共建共享理念，中方提出并积极推进共建“一带一路”倡议，得到各方热烈响应和支持。今年5月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举行，取得丰硕成果，推动共建“一带一路”进入全面实施的新阶段。中方愿以此为契机，同亚太伙伴深化政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通，实现协同联动发展，朝着命运共同体方向迈进。	
China has put forward the Belt and Road Initiative and is pursuing it in a spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. This initiative is well received and supported by various parties. The successful and fruitful Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation held in Beijing in May marked a new stage of full implementation. Going forward, China will deepen policy, infrastructure, trade, financial and people-to-people connectivity with our Asia-Pacific partners, seek interconnected development and move toward a community of shared future.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
大家都很关注中国的未来发展。上个月，中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会成功举行。我们立足于中国特色社会主义进入新时代的历史方位，着眼于实现社会主义现代化和中华民族伟大复兴的总任务，制定了未来一个时期的基本方略和发展蓝图。我们将坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，着力解决好发展不平衡不充分的问题，大力提升发展质量和效益，更好满足人民在经济、政治、文化、社会、生态等方面日益增长的需要，更好推动人的全面发展、社会全面进步。我们将深入贯彻新发展理念，全面深化改革，加快建设创新型国家，推动形成全面开放新格局，建设现代化经济体系。	
You may all have an interest in China's future development. Last month's 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China was a great success. We laid out our development strategy and blueprint for the coming decades, keeping in mind that socialism with Chinese characteristics has entered a new era whose overriding goal is socialist modernization and national rejuvenation. We will continue to be guided by a philosophy of people-oriented development, resolve the issue of unbalanced and inadequate development and raise the quality and efficiency of growth to better meet our people's ever-growing needs for economic, political, cultural, social and ecological progress, promote all-round development of our people and facilitate social progress across the board. We will act on the new vision of development, comprehensively deepen reform, turn China into an innovation-driven country at a faster pace, break new ground in pursuing opening-up on all fronts and build a modern economic system.
我相信，一个发展动力更足、人民获得感更强、同世界互动更深入的中国，必将为亚太和世界创造更多机遇，作出更大贡献。	
I am convinced that a China that enjoys stronger growth and interacts more with the world and whose people have a greater sense of fulfillment will surely bring more opportunities and make greater contributions to the Asia-Pacific and the world at large.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.
63. 习近平在金砖国家工商论坛开幕式上的讲话
深化金砖伙伴关系 开辟更加光明未来
Stronger BRICS Partnership for a Brighter Future
　　　　——在金砖国家领导人厦门会晤大范围会议上的讲话
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Xiamen Summit
2017年9月4日，厦门
Xiamen, 4 September 2017
尊敬的祖马总统
尊敬的特梅尔总统，
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
女士们、先生们、朋友们：
Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,
Your Excellency President Michel Temer,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
很高兴同各位同事再次相聚。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，对大家出席金砖国家领导人厦门会晤表示热烈的欢迎。我期待着同各位同事一道，围绕“深化金砖伙伴关系，开辟更加光明未来”的会晤主题，回顾总结金砖合作，勾画未来发展蓝图，开启合作新航程。
I am delighted to meet with my colleagues again. I wish to begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people, a warm welcome to you all. Welcome to the BRICS Xiamen Summit. With the focus on the theme of the summit: “Stronger Partnership for a Brighter Future”, I look forward to working with you to take stock of BRICS cooperation, map out a blueprint for its future development and set sail on a new journey of cooperation.
金砖合作已经走过10年光辉历程，我们五国虽然山海相隔，但怀着合作共赢的共同目标走到了一起。
BRICS cooperation has traversed a glorious journey of one decade. Though separated by mountains and oceans, our five countries have been closely bound by a shared commitment to win-win cooperation.
中国古人说：“交得其道，千里同好，固于胶漆，坚于金石。”金砖合作之所以得到快速发展，关键在于找准了合作之道。这就是互尊互助，携手走适合本国国情的发展道路；秉持开放包容、合作共赢的精神，持之以恒推进经济、政治、人文合作；倡导国际公平正义，同其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家和衷共济，共同营造良好外部环境。
As an ancient Chinese saying goes, “A partnership forged with the right approach defies geographical distance; it is thicker than glue and stronger than metal and stone.” We owe the rapid development of BRICS cooperation to our adoption of a right approach. Guided by this approach, we have respected and supported each other in following the path of development suited to our respective national conditions; we have pushed forward economic, political and people-to-people cooperation in an open, inclusive and win-win spirit; and we have worked in unison with other emerging market and developing countries to uphold international justice and equity and foster a sound external environment.
事实证明，金砖合作契合我们五国发展共同需要，顺应历史大势。尽管我们五国国情不同，但我们对伙伴关系、繁荣发展的追求是共同的，这使我们能够超越差异和分歧，努力实现互利共赢。
Past progress shows that BRICS cooperation has met our common need for development and is in keeping with the trend of history. Though we have different national conditions, we share the commitment to pursuing development and prosperity through partnership. This has enabled us to rise above differences and seek win-win results.
当前，世界格局发生了许多深刻复杂变化。在这一背景下，金砖合作显得更加重要。五国人民希望我们携手促进发展，提高人民福祉。国际社会期待我们维护世界和平，推动共同发展。我们应该再接再厉，全面深化金砖伙伴关系，开启金砖合作第二个“金色十年”。
As the world undergoes profound and complex changes, BRICS cooperation has become more important. Our people expect us to jointly boost development and improve their well-being. The international community expects us to make contribution to world peace and common development. We must redouble our efforts to comprehensively deepen BRICS partnership and usher in the second “Golden Decade” of BRICS cooperation.
第一，致力于推进经济务实合作。务实合作是金砖合作的根基，在这方面我们成绩斐然。同时，我们也要看到，现在，金砖合作潜力还没有充分释放出来。据统计，2016年金砖国家对外投资1970亿美元，只有5.7%发生在我们五国之间。这说明，我们五国还有广阔合作空间。
First, we need to seek practical results in our economic cooperation. Results-oriented cooperation is the foundation of BRICS cooperation, and significant progress has been made in this regard. However, we have yet to fully tap the potential of BRICS cooperation. Statistics show that of the 197 billion US dollars outbound investment we made in 2016, only 5.7% took place among our five countries. This means BRICS cooperation still has broad space.
我们应该紧紧围绕经济务实合作这条主线，在贸易投资、货币金融、互联互通、可持续发展、创新和产业合作等领域拓展利益汇聚点。今年，我们制定了《金砖国家服务贸易合作路线图》、《金砖国家投资便利化纲要》、《金砖国家电子商务合作倡议》、《金砖国家创新合作行动计划》、《金砖国家深化工业领域合作行动计划》，成立了新开发银行非洲区域中心，决定建立金砖国家示范电子口岸网络，在税收、电子商务、本币债券、政府和社会资本合作、金融机构和服务网络化布局等方面达成积极共识，各领域务实合作不断机制化、实心化，含金量不断提升。
We need to stay focused on promoting results-oriented economic cooperation, and expand converging interests in trade and investment, currency and finance, connectivity, sustainable development, innovation and industrial cooperation. This year, we have formulated the BRICS Trade in Services Cooperation Roadmap, the Outlines for BRICS Investment Facilitation, the BRICS E-Commerce Cooperation Initiative, the BRICS Action Plan for Innovation Cooperation and the Action Plan for Deepening Industrial Cooperation Among BRICS Countries. We have launched the African Regional Center of the New Development Bank (NDB), decided to set up the BRICS Model E-Port Network and reached extensive agreement on taxation, e-commerce, local currency bond, public-private partnership, and the network of financial institutions and services. Our practical cooperation has become more institutionalized and substantive, and delivered more tangible results.
我愿借此机会宣布，中方将设立首期5亿元人民币金砖国家经济技术合作交流计划，用于加强经贸等领域政策交流和务实合作。向新开发银行项目准备基金出资400万美元，支持银行业务运营和长远发展。我们愿同各方一道努力，把以往成果和共识落实好，让现有机制运行好，共同把握新工业革命带来的历史机遇，积极探索务实合作新领域新方式，拉紧联系纽带，让金砖合作机制行稳致远。
I wish to announce here that China will launch the Economic and Technical Cooperation Plan for BRICS Countries with 500 million yuan for the first term to facilitate policy exchange and practical cooperation in the economic and trade fields. China will contribute four million US dollars to the NDB Project Preparation Facility to support the business operation and long-term development of the bank. China will work with all parties to follow through on the outcomes and consensus achieved in the past, and make good use of existing mechanisms. Together, we must seize the historic opportunities of the new industrial revolution, explore new areas and models of practical cooperation, and enhance our links to ensure sustained and steady progress of the BRICS cooperation mechanism.
第二，致力于加强发展战略对接。我们五国虽然国情不同，但处在相近发展阶段，具有相同发展目标，都已进入经济爬坡过坎的时期。加强发展战略对接，发挥各自在资源、市场、劳动力等方面比较优势，将激发我们五国增长潜力和30亿人民创造力，开辟出巨大发展空间。
Second, we need to strengthen the complementarity of our development strategies. Despite our differences in national conditions, our five countries are in a similar stage of development and share the same development goals. We all face an arduous task in growing the economy. Strengthening the complementarity of our development strategies will help bring out our comparative strengths in resources, market and labor force, and release the growth potential of the five countries and the creativity of our three billion people, opening up huge space for development.
我们应该在大局上谋划、关键处落子，本着共商、共建、共享原则，寻找发展政策和优先领域的契合点，继续向贸易投资大市场、货币金融大流通、基础设施大联通目标迈进。要从结构性改革、可持续发展等角度入手，在创新创业、产业产能等领域拓展利益汇聚点，交流分享经验，助力彼此经济发展。处理好增长速度和质量、效益的关系，以落实2030年可持续发展议程为契机，谋求经济、社会、环境效益协调统一，实现联动包容发展。
We need to plan well at the macro level and take concrete actions in key areas. Acting in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, we need to identify those areas where our development policies and priorities converge, and continue to work toward the goal of connectivity in trade and investment, currency and finance, and infrastructure. With a focus on structural reform and sustainable development, we need to expand our converging interests and share experience on innovation, entrepreneurship, industrial development and production capacity to boost our respective economic development. It is important to strike a balance between the speed of growth and the quality and efficiency of growth. By implementing the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, we have the opportunity to achieve balanced economic, social and environmental progress, and bring about interconnected and inclusive development.
第三，致力于推动国际秩序朝更加公正合理方向发展。随着我们五国同世界的联系更为紧密，客观上要求我们积极参与全球治理。没有我们五国参与，许多重大紧迫的全球性问题难以有效解决。我们就事关国际和平与发展的问题共同发声，共提方案，既符合国际社会期待，也有助于维护我们的共同利益。
Third, we need to make the international order more just and equitable. Our ever closer ties with the rest of the world require that we play a more active part in global governance. Without our participation, many pressing global challenges cannot be effectively resolved. We should speak with one voice and jointly present our solutions to issues concerning international peace and development. This meets the expectation of the international community, and will help safeguard our common interests.
我们应该坚定奉行多边主义和国际关系基本准则，推动构建新型国际关系，为各国发展创造和平稳定环境。要推动开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，建设开放型世界经济，支持多边贸易体制，反对保护主义。要推进全球经济治理改革，提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权，为解决南北发展失衡、促进世界经济增长提供新动力。
We should remain committed to multilateralism and the basic norms governing international relations, work for a new type of international relations, and foster a peaceful and stable environment for the development of all countries. We need to make economic globalization open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all, build an open world economy, support the multilateral trading regime and oppose protectionism. We need to advance the reform of global economic governance, increase the representation and voice of emerging market and developing countries, and inject new impetus into the efforts to address the development gap between the North and South and boost global growth.
第四，致力于促进人文民间交流。国之交在于民相亲。只有深耕厚植，友谊与合作之树才能枝繁叶茂。加强我们五国人文交流，让伙伴关系理念扎根人民心中，是一项值得长期投入的工作。这项工作做好了，将使金砖合作永葆活力。
Fourth, we need to promote people-to-people exchanges. Amity between the people holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. Only with intensive care can the tree of friendship and cooperation grow luxuriant. Enhancing the exchanges among our peoples and seeing the spirit of partnership embraced by all is a worthy cause that deserves our enduring commitment. A job well done in this regard will keep BRICS cooperation vibrant.
我们高兴地看到，我们五国领导人就加强金砖人文交流达成的重要共识正在变成现实。今年五国人文交流合作全面铺开，举行了运动会、电影节、文化节、传统医药高级别会议等丰富多彩的活动。希望在我们共同关心和推动下，这些活动能够经常化、机制化，并努力深入基层，面向广大民众，营造百花齐放的生动局面。
We are pleased to note that the important consensus reached at the leadership level on closer people-to-people exchanges is being translated into reality. This year, people-to-people exchanges among our five countries have been in full swing, marked by the diverse activities of the BRICS Games, the BRICS Film Festival, the BRICS Culture Festival and the High-level Meeting on Traditional Medicine. We hope that through our joint efforts, these activities will take place regularly and be institutionalized. We need to expand our outreach to get the public more involved and encourage more lively exchanges of diverse cultures.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
过去10年，是金砖国家集中精力谋发展的10年，也是坚持不懈深化伙伴关系的10年。在金砖合作的历史进程中，10年只是一个开端。正如年初我在致各位同事的信中所说，展望未来，金砖合作必将得到更大发展，也必将在国际事务中发挥更大作用。让我们共同努力，推动金砖合作从厦门再次扬帆远航，开启第二个“金色十年”的大门，使金砖合作造福我们五国人民，惠及各国人民！
The past decade has seen the unremitting efforts of BRICS countries in pursuing development and deepening partnership. It is but a beginning in the history of BRICS cooperation. As I said in my letters to you early this year, looking ahead, BRICS cooperation is set to achieve greater development and play an even bigger role in international affairs. Let us set sail from Xiamen and join hands to usher in the second “Golden Decade” of BRICS cooperation and deliver greater benefits to the people of our five countries and around the world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
58.习近平在金砖国家领导人第九次会晤上的讲话全文
深化金砖伙伴关系 开辟更加光明未来
Stronger BRICS Partnership for a Brighter Future　　　　
——在金砖国家领导人厦门会晤大范围会议上的讲话
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Xiamen Summit
2017年9月4日，厦门
Xiamen, 4 September 2017
尊敬的祖马总统，尊敬的特梅尔总统，尊敬的普京总统，尊敬的莫迪总理，女士们、先生们、朋友们：
Your Excellency President Jacob Zuma,Your Excellency President Michel Temer,Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,Ladies and Gentlemen,Dear Friends,
很高兴同各位同事再次相聚。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，对大家出席金砖国家领导人厦门会晤表示热烈的欢迎。我期待着同各位同事一道，围绕“深化金砖伙伴关系，开辟更加光明未来”的会晤主题，回顾总结金砖合作，勾画未来发展蓝图，开启合作新航程。
I am delighted to meet with my colleagues again. I wish to begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people, a warm welcome to you all. Welcome to the BRICS Xiamen Summit. With the focus on the theme of the summit: “Stronger Partnership for a Brighter Future”, I look forward to working with you to take stock of BRICS cooperation, map out a blueprint for its future development and set sail on a new journey of cooperation.
金砖合作已经走过10年光辉历程，我们五国虽然山海相隔，但怀着合作共赢的共同目标走到了一起。
BRICS cooperation has traversed a glorious journey of one decade. Though separated by mountains and oceans, our five countries have been closely bound by a shared commitment to win-win cooperation.
中国古人说：“交得其道，千里同好，固于胶漆，坚于金石。”金砖合作之所以得到快速发展，关键在于找准了合作之道。这就是互尊互助，携手走适合本国国情的发展道路；秉持开放包容、合作共赢的精神，持之以恒推进经济、政治、人文合作；倡导国际公平正义，同其他新兴市场国家和发展中国家和衷共济，共同营造良好外部环境。
As an ancient Chinese saying goes, “A partnership forged with the right approach defies geographical distance; it is thicker than glue and stronger than metal and stone.” We owe the rapid development of BRICS cooperation to our adoption of a right approach. Guided by this approach, we have respected and supported each other in following the path of development suited to our respective national conditions; we have pushed forward economic, political and people-to-people cooperation in an open, inclusive and win-win spirit; and we have worked in unison with other emerging market and developing countries to uphold international justice and equity and foster a sound external environment.
事实证明，金砖合作契合我们五国发展共同需要，顺应历史大势。尽管我们五国国情不同，但我们对伙伴关系、繁荣发展的追求是共同的，这使我们能够超越差异和分歧，努力实现互利共赢。
Past progress shows that BRICS cooperation has met our common need for development and is in keeping with the trend of history. Though we have different national conditions, we share the commitment to pursuing development and prosperity through partnership. This has enabled us to rise above differences and seek win-win results.
当前，世界格局发生了许多深刻复杂变化。在这一背景下，金砖合作显得更加重要。五国人民希望我们携手促进发展，提高人民福祉。国际社会期待我们维护世界和平，推动共同发展。我们应该再接再厉，全面深化金砖伙伴关系，开启金砖合作第二个“金色十年”。
As the world undergoes profound and complex changes, BRICS cooperation has become more important. Our people expect us to jointly boost development and improve their well-being. The international community expects us to make contribution to world peace and common development. We must redouble our efforts to comprehensively deepen BRICS partnership and usher in the second “Golden Decade” of BRICS cooperation.
第一，致力于推进经济务实合作。务实合作是金砖合作的根基，在这方面我们成绩斐然。同时，我们也要看到，现在，金砖合作潜力还没有充分释放出来。据统计，2016年金砖国家对外投资1970亿美元，只有5.7%发生在我们五国之间。这说明，我们五国还有广阔合作空间。
First, we need to seek practical results in our economic cooperation. Results-oriented cooperation is the foundation of BRICS cooperation, and significant progress has been made in this regard. However, we have yet to fully tap the potential of BRICS cooperation. Statistics show that of the 197 billion US dollars outbound investment we made in 2016, only 5.7% took place among our five countries. This means BRICS cooperation still has broad space.
我们应该紧紧围绕经济务实合作这条主线，在贸易投资、货币金融、互联互通、可持续发展、创新和产业合作等领域拓展利益汇聚点。今年，我们制定了《金砖国家服务贸易合作路线图》、《金砖国家投资便利化纲要》、《金砖国家电子商务合作倡议》、《金砖国家创新合作行动计划》、《金砖国家深化工业领域合作行动计划》，成立了新开发银行非洲区域中心，决定建立金砖国家示范电子口岸网络，在税收、电子商务、本币债券、政府和社会资本合作、金融机构和服务网络化布局等方面达成积极共识，各领域务实合作不断机制化、实心化，含金量不断提升。
We need to stay focused on promoting results-oriented economic cooperation, and expand converging interests in trade and investment, currency and finance, connectivity, sustainable development, innovation and industrial cooperation. This year, we have formulated the BRICS Trade in Services Cooperation Roadmap, the Outlines for BRICS Investment Facilitation, the BRICS E-Commerce Cooperation Initiative, the BRICS Action Plan for Innovation Cooperation and the Action Plan for Deepening Industrial Cooperation Among BRICS Countries. We have launched the African Regional Center of the New Development Bank (NDB), decided to set up the BRICS Model E-Port Network and reached extensive agreement on taxation, e-commerce, local currency bond, public-private partnership, and the network of financial institutions and services. Our practical cooperation has become more institutionalized and substantive, and delivered more tangible results.
我愿借此机会宣布，中方将设立首期5亿元人民币金砖国家经济技术合作交流计划，用于加强经贸等领域政策交流和务实合作。向新开发银行项目准备基金出资400万美元，支持银行业务运营和长远发展。我们愿同各方一道努力，把以往成果和共识落实好，让现有机制运行好，共同把握新工业革命带来的历史机遇，积极探索务实合作新领域新方式，拉紧联系纽带，让金砖合作机制行稳致远。
I wish to announce here that China will launch the Economic and Technical Cooperation Plan for BRICS Countries with 500 million yuan for the first term to facilitate policy exchange and practical cooperation in the economic and trade fields. China will contribute four million US dollars to the NDB Project Preparation Facility to support the business operation and long-term development of the bank. China will work with all parties to follow through on the outcomes and consensus achieved in the past, and make good use of existing mechanisms. Together, we must seize the historic opportunities of the new industrial revolution, explore new areas and models of practical cooperation, and enhance our links to ensure sustained and steady progress of the BRICS cooperation mechanism.
第二，致力于加强发展战略对接。我们五国虽然国情不同，但处在相近发展阶段，具有相同发展目标，都已进入经济爬坡过坎的时期。加强发展战略对接，发挥各自在资源、市场、劳动力等方面比较优势，将激发我们五国增长潜力和30亿人民创造力，开辟出巨大发展空间。
Second, we need to strengthen the complementarity of our development strategies. Despite our differences in national conditions, our five countries are in a similar stage of development and share the same development goals. We all face an arduous task in growing the economy. Strengthening the complementarity of our development strategies will help bring out our comparative strengths in resources, market and labor force, and release the growth potential of the five countries and the creativity of our three billion people, opening up huge space for development.
我们应该在大局上谋划、关键处落子，本着共商、共建、共享原则，寻找发展政策和优先领域的契合点，继续向贸易投资大市场、货币金融大流通、基础设施大联通目标迈进。要从结构性改革、可持续发展等角度入手，在创新创业、产业产能等领域拓展利益汇聚点，交流分享经验，助力彼此经济发展。处理好增长速度和质量、效益的关系，以落实2030年可持续发展议程为契机，谋求经济、社会、环境效益协调统一，实现联动包容发展。
We need to plan well at the macro level and take concrete actions in key areas. Acting in the spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, we need to identify those areas where our development policies and priorities converge, and continue to work toward the goal of connectivity in trade and investment, currency and finance, and infrastructure. With a focus on structural reform and sustainable development, we need to expand our converging interests and share experience on innovation, entrepreneurship, industrial development and production capacity to boost our respective economic development. It is important to strike a balance between the speed of growth and the quality and efficiency of growth. By implementing the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, we have the opportunity to achieve balanced economic, social and environmental progress, and bring about interconnected and inclusive development.
第三，致力于推动国际秩序朝更加公正合理方向发展。随着我们五国同世界的联系更为紧密，客观上要求我们积极参与全球治理。没有我们五国参与，许多重大紧迫的全球性问题难以有效解决。我们就事关国际和平与发展的问题共同发声，共提方案，既符合国际社会期待，也有助于维护我们的共同利益。
Third, we need to make the international order more just and equitable. Our ever closer ties with the rest of the world require that we play a more active part in global governance. Without our participation, many pressing global challenges cannot be effectively resolved. We should speak with one voice and jointly present our solutions to issues concerning international peace and development. This meets the expectation of the international community, and will help safeguard our common interests.
我们应该坚定奉行多边主义和国际关系基本准则，推动构建新型国际关系，为各国发展创造和平稳定环境。要推动开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化，建设开放型世界经济，支持多边贸易体制，反对保护主义。要推进全球经济治理改革，提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权，为解决南北发展失衡、促进世界经济增长提供新动力。
We should remain committed to multilateralism and the basic norms governing international relations, work for a new type of international relations, and foster a peaceful and stable environment for the development of all countries. We need to make economic globalization open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all, build an open world economy, support the multilateral trading regime and oppose protectionism. We need to advance the reform of global economic governance, increase the representation and voice of emerging market and developing countries, and inject new impetus into the efforts to address the development gap between the North and South and boost global growth.
第四，致力于促进人文民间交流。国之交在于民相亲。只有深耕厚植，友谊与合作之树才能枝繁叶茂。加强我们五国人文交流，让伙伴关系理念扎根人民心中，是一项值得长期投入的工作。这项工作做好了，将使金砖合作永葆活力。
Fourth, we need to promote people-to-people exchanges. Amity between the people holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. Only with intensive care can the tree of friendship and cooperation grow luxuriant. Enhancing the exchanges among our peoples and seeing the spirit of partnership embraced by all is a worthy cause that deserves our enduring commitment. A job well done in this regard will keep BRICS cooperation vibrant.
我们高兴地看到，我们五国领导人就加强金砖人文交流达成的重要共识正在变成现实。今年五国人文交流合作全面铺开，举行了运动会、电影节、文化节、传统医药高级别会议等丰富多彩的活动。希望在我们共同关心和推动下，这些活动能够经常化、机制化，并努力深入基层，面向广大民众，营造百花齐放的生动局面。
We are pleased to note that the important consensus reached at the leadership level on closer people-to-people exchanges is being translated into reality. This year, people-to-people exchanges among our five countries have been in full swing, marked by the diverse activities of the BRICS Games, the BRICS Film Festival, the BRICS Culture Festival and the High-level Meeting on Traditional Medicine. We hope that through our joint efforts, these activities will take place regularly and be institutionalized. We need to expand our outreach to get the public more involved and encourage more lively exchanges of diverse cultures.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
过去10年，是金砖国家集中精力谋发展的10年，也是坚持不懈深化伙伴关系的10年。在金砖合作的历史进程中，10年只是一个开端。正如年初我在致各位同事的信中所说，展望未来，金砖合作必将得到更大发展，也必将在国际事务中发挥更大作用。让我们共同努力，推动金砖合作从厦门再次扬帆远航，开启第二个“金色十年”的大门，使金砖合作造福我们五国人民，惠及各国人民！
The past decade has seen the unremitting efforts of BRICS countries in pursuing development and deepening partnership. It is but a beginning in the history of BRICS cooperation. As I said in my letters to you early this year, looking ahead, BRICS cooperation is set to achieve greater development and play an even bigger role in international affairs. Let us set sail from Xiamen and join hands to usher in the second “Golden Decade” of BRICS cooperation and deliver greater benefits to the people of our five countries and around the world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
53. 习近平同上海合作组织成员国领导人共同会见记者时的讲话
各位同事，
各位记者朋友，
女士们，先生们：
Dear colleagues, 
Friends from the press, 
Ladies and gentlemen,
大家下午好！很高兴同大家见面。
Good afternoon. It is my pleasure to meet with you.
上海合作组织成员国、观察员国领导人以及有关国际和地区组织负责人齐聚美丽的黄海之滨，共同描绘上海合作组织进入历史新阶段的发展蓝图，并就重大国际和地区问题深入交换意见，达成广泛共识。
Leaders of the member and observer states of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) and heads of international and regional organizations have gathered here at the beautiful coast of the Yellow Sea to draw up a blueprint for the SCO's development as it enters a new phase in history. We have had an in-depth exchange of views on major international and regional issues, and reached broad consensus.
这次峰会期间，我们充分肯定印度、巴基斯坦加入以来本组织取得的新发展，共同发表了《上海合作组织成员国元首理事会青岛宣言》、《上海合作组织成员国元首关于贸易便利化的联合声明》等文件，批准了《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》未来5年实施纲要。我们商定，恪守《上海合作组织宪章》宗旨和原则，弘扬互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展的“上海精神”，坚持睦邻友好，深化务实合作，共谋地区和平、稳定、发展大计。
During this summit, we have fully recognized the new progress made by our organization since the accession of India and Pakistan, issued several documents including the Qingdao Declaration of the Council of Heads of Member States of the SCO and the Joint Statement of the Heads of Member States of the SCO on Promoting Trade Facilitation, and ratified an action plan for implementing the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation of the SCO Member States covering the next five years. We have agreed to abide by the goals and principles of the SCO Charter, carry forward the Shanghai Spirit of mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations and pursuit of common development, and jointly pursue regional peace, stability and development by promoting good-neighborliness and friendship and deepening practical cooperation.
我们一致认为，当今世界正处在大发展大变革大调整时期，世界多极化、经济全球化深入发展，国与国相互依存更加紧密。世界经济复苏艰难曲折，国际和地区热点问题频发，各国面临许多共同威胁和挑战，没有哪个国家能够独自应对或独善其身。各国只有加强团结协作，深化和平合作、平等相待、开放包容、共赢共享的伙伴关系，才能实现持久稳定和发展。
We share the view that the world is undergoing major development, transformation and adjustment. The trend toward multi-polarity and economic globalization is deepening and countries are increasingly interdependent. In the face of tortuous recovery of the world economy and various international and regional hotspot issues, countries are confronted with many common threats and challenges that no one can tackle alone. Only by enhancing solidarity and coordination and deepening partnerships featuring peace, cooperation, equality, openness, inclusiveness and mutual benefit will we be able to achieve lasting stability and development.
我们一致主张，安全是上海合作组织可持续发展的基石。各方将秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，落实打击“三股势力”上海公约、反恐怖主义公约、反极端主义公约等合作文件，深化反恐情报交流和联合行动，加强相关法律基础和能力建设，有效打击“三股势力”、毒品贩运、跨国有组织犯罪、网络犯罪，发挥“上海合作组织－阿富汗联络组”作用，共同维护地区安全稳定。
We hold that security is the foundation for sustainable development of the SCO. All parties, guided by the vision for common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, will jointly uphold regional security and stability by implementing the Shanghai Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism, the Convention Against Terrorism, the Convention on Countering Extremism and other cooperation documents, promoting counter-terrorism intelligence exchanges and joint actions, strengthening legal foundation and capacity building, effectively combating terrorism, separatism, extremism, drug trafficking, transnational organized crime and cyber crime, and leveraging the role of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group.
我们一致指出，经济全球化和区域一体化是大势所趋。各方将维护世界贸易组织规则的权威性和有效性，巩固开放、包容、透明、非歧视、以规则为基础的多边贸易体制，反对任何形式的贸易保护主义。各方将继续秉持互利共赢原则，完善区域经济合作安排，加强“一带一路”建设合作和发展战略对接，深化经贸、投资、金融、互联互通、农业等领域合作，推进贸易和投资便利化，打造区域融合发展新格局，为地区各国人民谋福祉，为世界经济发展增动力。
We point out that economic globalization and regional integration are the compelling trend of our times. All parties will uphold the authority and efficacy of WTO rules, strengthen an open, inclusive, transparent, non-discriminatory and rules-based multilateral trading regime, and oppose trade protectionism of any form. All parties will continue to work in line with the principle of mutual benefit to improve regional economic cooperation arrangements, enhance the Belt and Road cooperation and complementarity of our respective development strategies, deepen cooperation in business, investment, finance, connectivity and agriculture, advance trade and investment facilitation, and foster new prospects for integrated development of the region to deliver benefits to our people and add fresh impetus to global growth.
我们一致强调，各国悠久历史和灿烂文化是人类的共同财富。各方愿在相互尊重文化多样性和社会价值观的基础上，继续在文化、教育、科技、环保、卫生、旅游、青年、媒体、体育等领域开展富有成效的多边和双边合作，促进文化互鉴、民心相通。
We stress that the time-honored history and splendid culture of countries are the shared wealth of mankind. On the basis of respecting each other's cultural diversity and social values, all parties will continue to carry out effective multilateral and bilateral cooperation in culture, education, science and technology, environmental protection, health, tourism, youth, media and sports, with a view to promoting mutual learning between cultures and amity between the peoples.
我们一致认为，上海合作组织扩大国际交往和合作十分重要。各方愿在平等互利基础上，深化同观察员国、对话伙伴等地区国家的合作，扩大同联合国及其他国际和地区组织的对话和交流，共同致力于促进世界持久和平和共同繁荣。
We believe that it is very important for the SCO to expand international interactions and cooperation. On the basis of equality and mutual benefit, all parties will work to deepen cooperation with regional countries including SCO observer states and dialogue partners, and step up dialogue and exchanges with the UN and other international and regional organizations to jointly promote lasting peace and common prosperity of the world.
我们一致商定，本次峰会后，吉尔吉斯共和国将担任上海合作组织轮值主席国。各方将积极支持和配合吉方履行主席国职责，办好明年峰会。
We agree that the Kyrgyz Republic will take over the rotating presidency of the SCO after this summit. All parties will actively support and cooperate with Kyrgyzstan in fulfilling its responsibilities as the President and ensuring the success of next year's summit.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
借此机会，我要感谢各国领导人和国际组织负责人出席这次峰会，感谢各方各界对中方担任上海合作组织主席国和筹办峰会期间给予的大力支持和协助，感谢媒体朋友们对上海合作组织发展和青岛峰会的关注。
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the leaders of all countries and heads of international organizations for attending the summit. I am grateful for the vigorous support and assistance China has received during its presidency and in hosting this summit. My thanks also go to friends from the media for covering the progress of the SCO and the Qingdao Summit.
我坚信，在大家共同努力下，上海合作组织的明天一定会更加美好！
I am confident that with our joint efforts, the SCO will enjoy an even better future.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
45. 习近平同中非合作论坛前任和新任非方共同主席国元首共见记者时的讲话
同中非合作论坛前任和新任非方共同主席国元首共见记者时的讲话
（2018年9月4日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the Joint Meeting with the Press Together with 
Presidents of the Previous and Sitting African Co-Chairs of FOCAC 
Beijing, 4 September 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的萨勒总统，
各位记者朋友，
女士们，先生们：
Your Excellency President Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, 
Your Excellency President Macky Sall, 
Friends from the Press, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
下午好！很高兴同大家见面。
Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to meet you here.
首先，我高兴地宣布，2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会刚刚圆满落幕！
First of all, it is my pleasure to announce that the 2018 Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) has just successfully concluded.
两天来，中非合作论坛成员方领导人齐聚北京，围绕“合作共赢，携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体”主题，回顾了2015年论坛约翰内斯堡峰会成果落实情况，谋划了中非关系未来发展，绘制了中非合作宏伟蓝图。会议发表了《关于构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体的北京宣言》，凝聚了中非双方对当前重大国际和地区问题的共识，向世界传递了中非携手并进的强烈信号。会议通过了《中非合作论坛－北京行动计划》，确定了未来3年中非将以实施“八大行动”为重点，全面加强各领域务实合作。
In the past two days, leaders of FOCAC members gathered in Beijing under the theme of "China and Africa: Toward an Even Stronger Community with a Shared Future through Win-Win Cooperation". We reviewed implementation of the outcomes of the 2015 FOCAC Johannesburg Summit, discussed plans for future growth of China-Africa relations, and drew the blueprint for China-Africa cooperation to go ahead. The Summit issued the Beijing Declaration -- Toward an Even Stronger China-Africa Community with a Shared Future, which embodies the agreement reached between China and Africa on major regional and international issues in today's world and sends out a strong message that China and Africa will go hand in hand in years to come. The Summit adopted the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation Beijing Action Plan, and identified eight major initiatives as the focus of China-Africa cooperation in the coming three years to strengthen practical cooperation across the board. 
我们一致认为，当今世界正经历百年未有之大变局，世界多极化、经济全球化深入发展，各国人民的命运从未像今天这样紧紧相连。同时，世界面临的不稳定性不确定性突出，人类面临许多共同挑战。我们愿携起手来，共同打造责任共担、合作共赢、幸福共享、文化共兴、安全共筑、和谐共生的中非命运共同体，更好维护中非共同利益，壮大发展中国家力量，让我们生活的世界变得更加均衡美好，为推动构建人类命运共同体树立时代榜样。
We agreed that the world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century. Economic globalization is deepening in an increasingly multipolar world. The future of the world's people has never been so closely linked. Meanwhile, mankind faces a host of common challenges as uncertainties and destabilizing factors continue to mount. China and Africa will join hands to build a China-Africa community with a shared future that features joint responsibility, win-win cooperation, happiness for all, common cultural prosperity, common security, and harmonious co-existence. Together, we will better uphold the common interests of China and Africa, boost the strength of developing countries, and make the world a more balanced and better place for everyone to live in. This will set a good example for the building of a community with a shared future for mankind in our times.
我们一致认为，中非关系历经时间洗礼和国际风云变幻考验，走出了一条特色鲜明的合作共赢之路，正处于历史最好时期。中非双方愿加强战略对接和政策协调，推进中非共建“一带一路”合作，并将“一带一路”建设同非洲联盟《2063年议程》、联合国2030年可持续发展议程、非洲各国发展战略紧密对接，重点实施好产业促进、设施联通、贸易便利、绿色发展、能力建设、健康卫生、人文交流、和平安全“八大行动”，为中非合作提供更多机遇、增添更强动力。
We agreed that China-Africa relations have stood the test of time and international changes and embarked on a distinctive path of win-win cooperation. China-Africa relations are at their best in history. The two sides will enhance synergy between strategies and policies, advance cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative, and pool the strength of this Initiative with that of Agenda 2063 of the African Union, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the United Nations, and national development strategies of African countries. The focus will be on the implementation of eight major initiatives, namely, industrial promotion, infrastructure connectivity, trade facilitation, green development, capacity building, health care, people-to-people exchange, and peace and security. It will provide more opportunities and give even stronger impetus to China-Africa cooperation.
我们一致认为，中非关系呈现出前所未有的凝聚力、生命力、创造力，为中非各自发展提供了重要机遇。中国是最大的发展中国家，非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆。中非将矢志不渝加强团结合作，在合作共赢、共同发展的道路上结伴前行。中国将继续秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观，同非洲一道，从中非友好互信的深厚底蕴中汲取力量，在中非务实合作的蓬勃势头中把握方向，推动中非全面战略合作伙伴关系向深走实、行稳致远。
We agreed that China-Africa relations have demonstrated unprecedented solidarity, vitality and creativity, which offers significant opportunities for the development of each side. China is the biggest developing country, and Africa the continent with a large gathering of developing countries in the world. The two sides will stay committed to strengthening unity and cooperation and working with each other along the path of win-win cooperation and common development. China will continue to act in the principle of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith and of pursuing the greater good and shared interests. Together, China and Africa will draw on the strength of our profound friendship and mutual trust, keep to the right direction as practical cooperation flourishes, and work for solid, steady and sustained growth of the China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership.
我们一致认为，实现发展振兴是非洲的应有权利，需要非洲国家和人民努力，也离不开国际社会支持。中非合作是国际对非合作的一部分，中非合作一贯坚持互利共赢、开放包容。我们希望国际合作伙伴相互学习借鉴，发挥各自优势，形成合力，共同为非洲和平与发展作出贡献。在对非合作中，国际社会各方都要尊重非洲主权，倾听非洲意见，重视非洲主张，兑现对非洲的承诺。
We agreed that Africa is entitled to achieving development and invigoration. This requires both the hard work of African countries and their people, and the support from the international community. China-Africa cooperation, as part of the international cooperation with Africa, follows the principle of mutual benefit, openness and inclusiveness. We hope that Africa's international cooperation partners could learn from each other, leverage their respective strengths, build synergy and jointly contribute to peace and development in Africa. While conducting cooperation with Africa, all parties of the international community need to respect the sovereignty of African countries, listen to Africa's voice, take Africa's stance seriously and deliver on the promises made to Africa.
会议顺利完成了既定日程，中非领导人在所有重大问题上都达成重要共识，发出了共同声音。北京峰会取得圆满成功，收获的是沉甸甸的成果，揭开了中非关系新的历史篇章，树立了南南合作新的时代丰碑。
The meeting has completed all items on the agenda. Chinese and African leaders have reached significant common ground and spoken with one voice on all major issues. The Beijing Summit has achieved great success and produced significant outcomes. It has opened a new chapter in the history of China-Africa relations and set a new milestone for South-South cooperation of our times.
借中非友好大家庭团聚的机会，中非领导人这几天举行了密集的双边会晤，一些非洲国家元首和政府首脑还对中国已经或即将进行访问。我同所有出席北京峰会和访华的非方领导人举行了双边会晤，就双边关系及共同关心的问题深入交换意见，达成广泛重要共识。
Over the past few days, Chinese and African leaders also had intensive bilateral meetings during this friendly gathering of the big China-Africa family, and some African heads of state and government have paid or will pay bilateral visits to China. I had bilateral meetings with all the African leaders who attended the Beijing Summit and visited China. We had in-depth exchange of views and reached broad and significant common understanding on our respective bilateral relations and issues of shared interest.
中非合作论坛已经成立18年。论坛应时代潮流而生，伴中非合作而兴，不断走向成熟和完善，成为国际对非合作和南南合作的一面旗帜。北京峰会成功举行，推动中非全面战略合作伙伴关系站在新的历史起点上，开启了新的历史征程。我们要共同做实做强中非合作论坛，全面高效落实北京峰会成果，以实实在在的成果造福中非人民。
Eighteen years ago, the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation was established to answer the call of the times. Since then, it has grown strong and prospered as China-Africa cooperation continues to flourish. It has become a distinct symbol in international cooperation with Africa and in South-South cooperation. The success of the Beijing Summit marks a new historic starting point for the China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership. We are about to set out on a new journey in history. We need to work together to substantiate and strengthen FOCAC, and deliver on the outcomes of the Beijing Summit in full and in real earnest, so that China-Africa cooperation will bring tangible benefits to our peoples.
女士们、先生们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
在北京峰会结束之际，我衷心感谢出席峰会的非洲国家领导人，他们不辞辛劳，积极建言献策，贡献经验和智慧，成就了本次峰会的圆满成功！
As the Beijing Summit comes to a conclusion, I wish to express my heartfelt thanks to African leaders attending the Summit. Their hard work, active contribution, valuable experience and great wisdom have all contributed to the great success of the Summit. 
我特别感谢拉马福萨总统两天来同我密切合作，共同主持这次峰会，感谢南非在担任论坛共同主席国期间所做的出色工作。我祝贺塞内加尔接任新一届论坛共同主席国，感谢萨勒总统为推动论坛发展表现出的热情
In particular, I wish to thank President Cyril Ramaphosa for working closely with me over the past two days to co-chair the Summit, and I thank South Africa for the excellent job it has done as co-chair of FOCAC. I congratulate Senegal on taking over as the new co-chair of FOCAC, and I thank President Macky Sall for his strong commitment to advancing the Forum in its development. 
我感谢来自中非双方的工商、文化、智库、媒体等各界朋友积极参与和支持本次峰会。感谢媒体朋友们，是你们向世界全面、及时传递峰会盛况和成果。希望你们继续关注中非合作论坛，支持中非关系发展。
My thanks also go to friends from the Chinese and African business and cultural communities as well as think tanks and the media for your active participation and support. To friends from the media, I thank you for your comprehensive and timely coverage of the Summit and its outcomes. I hope you will continue to follow the development of FOCAC and support China-Africa relations.
我相信，在我们共同努力下，在26亿多中非人民积极支持下，我们携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体的伟大事业一定会取得成功，中非关系的明天一定会更加美好！
I am convinced that with our concerted efforts and with the strong support of the over 2.6 billion Chinese and African people, we will meet our goal of building an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future. China-Africa relations will embrace even brighter prospects in the time to come.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
46. 习近平在2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会开幕式上的主旨讲话
携手共命运　同心促发展
——在2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会开幕式上的主旨讲话
（2018年9月3日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together for Common Development and a Shared Future  
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping  
President of the People's Republic of China  
At the Opening Ceremony of the 2018 Beijing Summit  
Of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation  
Beijing, 3 September 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的非洲联盟轮值主席卡加梅总统，
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑、代表团团长，
尊敬的联合国秘书长古特雷斯先生，
尊敬的非洲联盟委员会主席法基先生，
女士们，先生们，
朋友们：
Your Excellency President Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, 
Your Excellency President Paul Kagame, Chairperson of the African Union, 
Distinguished Heads of State and Government, 
Distinguished Heads of Delegation, 
Your Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, Secretary General of the United Nations, 
Your Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the AU Commission, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Friends,
九月的北京，金风送爽，秋色怡人。在这美好的季节，中非友好大家庭的新老朋友们再次相聚，共襄2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会盛举，我们感到十分高兴。
September has just set in Beijing, bringing with it refreshing breeze and picturesque autumn scenery. And we are so delighted to have all of you with us, friends both old and new, in this lovely season for the reunion of the China-Africa big family at the 2018 Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC).
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位同事和嘉宾的到来表示热烈的欢迎！我也愿通过你们，向兄弟的非洲人民转达中国人民的诚挚问候和良好祝愿！
I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, a very warm welcome to all of you, dear colleagues and guests. I also wish to extend, through you, the best regards and cordial greetings of the Chinese people to the brotherly people of Africa.
我要特别提到的是，自约翰内斯堡峰会以来，中非合作论坛相继增加了冈比亚、圣多美和普林西比、布基纳法索3名新成员。今天，巴罗总统、特罗瓦达总理、卡博雷总统分别率领三国代表团出席北京峰会，让我们以热烈的掌声欢迎他们！
I wish to mention in particular that since the Johannesburg Summit, FOCAC has had three new members, namely, the Gambia, Sao Tome and Principe and Burkina Faso. Today, we are joined by President Barrow, Prime Minister Trovoada and President Kabore and their delegations. Let us welcome them with a warm round of applause!
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
一个多月前，我以中国国家主席身份第四次访问了非洲，这也是我本人第九次踏上非洲这片热土。访问期间，我再次目睹了非洲大地富饶美丽，非洲发展充满生机，非洲人民渴望幸福生活。我也更加坚定了这样的信念：非洲发展不可限量，非洲未来充满希望，中非友好合作前景广阔，中非全面战略合作伙伴关系发展大有可为！
Over a month ago, I paid my fourth visit to Africa as the Chinese President, which was also my ninth visit to this land of great promise. During the last visit, I once again saw an Africa that is beautiful and richly endowed, that is full of dynamism in development, and I learned about first-hand the African people's ardent hope for a better future. I concluded the visit even more convinced that Africa's development has great potential, that this great continent is full of hope, that China-Africa friendship and cooperation have broad vistas, and that China and Africa can forge an even stronger comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership!
“根之茂者其实遂，膏之沃者其光晔。”历史有其规律和逻辑。中非双方基于相似遭遇和共同使命，在过去的岁月里同心同向、守望相助，走出了一条特色鲜明的合作共赢之路。
As an ancient Chinese scholar once observed, "Only with deep roots can a tree yield rich fruit; only filled with oil can a lamp burn brightly." History follows its own rules and logic. With similar fate in the past and a common mission, China and Africa have extended sympathy to and helped each other throughout all the years. Together, we have embarked on a distinctive path of win-win cooperation.
在这条道路上，中国始终秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观，同非洲各国团结一心、同舟共济、携手前进。
Marching on this path, China has followed the principle of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith and the principle of pursuing the greater good and shared interests. China has stood with African countries. Together, we have worked in unity and forged ahead.
——中国在合作中坚持真诚友好、平等相待。13亿多中国人民始终同12亿多非洲人民同呼吸、共命运，始终尊重非洲、热爱非洲、支持非洲，坚持做到“五不”，即：不干预非洲国家探索符合国情的发展道路，不干涉非洲内政，不把自己的意志强加于人，不在对非援助中附加任何政治条件，不在对非投资融资中谋取政治私利。中国希望各国都能在处理非洲事务时做到这“五不”。中国永远是非洲的好朋友、好伙伴、好兄弟。任何人都不能破坏中非人民的大团结！
-- China values sincerity, friendship and equality in pursuing cooperation. The over 1.3 billion Chinese people have been with the over 1.2 billion African people in pursuing a shared future. We respect Africa, love Africa and support Africa. We follow a "five-no" approach in our relations with Africa: no interference in African countries' pursuit of development paths that fit their national conditions; no interference in African countries' internal affairs; no imposition of our will on African countries; no attachment of political strings to assistance to Africa; and no seeking of selfish political gains in investment and financing cooperation with Africa. We hope this "five-no" approach could apply to other countries as they deal with matters regarding Africa. For China, we are always Africa's good friend, good partner and good brother. No one could undermine the great unity between the Chinese people and the African people.
——中国在合作中坚持义利相兼、以义为先。中国相信中非合作的必由之路就是发挥各自优势，把中国发展同助力非洲发展紧密结合，实现合作共赢、共同发展。中国主张多予少取、先予后取、只予不取，张开怀抱欢迎非洲搭乘中国发展快车。任何人都不能阻挡中非人民振兴的步伐！
-- China pursues common interests and puts friendship first in pursuing cooperation. China believes that the sure way to boost China-Africa cooperation is for both sides to leverage its respective strength; it is for China to complement Africa's development through its own growth, and it is for both China and Africa to pursue win-win cooperation and common development. In doing so, China follows the principle of giving more and taking less, giving before taking and giving without asking for return. With open arms, we welcome African countries aboard the express train of China's development. No one could hold back the Chinese people or the African people as we march toward rejuvenation.
——中国在合作中坚持发展为民、务实高效。中国坚持把中非人民利益放在首位，为中非人民福祉而推进合作，让合作成果惠及中非人民。凡是答应非洲兄弟的事，就会尽心尽力办好。面对新形势新挑战，中国不断完善机制、创新理念、拓展领域，提高合作质量和水平，稳步迈向更高水平。中非合作好不好，只有中非人民最有发言权。任何人都不能以想象和臆测否定中非合作的显著成就！
-- China takes a people-oriented approach in pursuing practical cooperation with efficiency. With top priority given to the interests of Chinese and African peoples, China advances its cooperation with Africa to improve the well-being of Chinese and African peoples and deliver more benefits to them. We will fully honor the promises we have made to our African brothers. Faced with new developments and challenges, China will continue to improve institution building, develop new ideas and expand areas of cooperation with Africa to bring our cooperation to greater heights. Ultimately, it is for the peoples of China and Africa to judge the performance of China-Africa cooperation. No one could deny the remarkable achievements made in China-Africa cooperation, not with their assumption or imagination.
——中国在合作中坚持开放包容、兼收并蓄。中国始终认为，非洲实现长治久安、发展振兴，是非洲人民心愿，也是国际社会责任。中国愿同国际合作伙伴一道，支持非洲和平与发展。凡是对非洲有利的事情，我们都欢迎、都支持，全世界都应该尽力做、认真做。任何人都不能阻止和干扰国际社会支持非洲发展的积极行动！
-- China takes an open and inclusive approach to cooperation. China is fully aware that long-term stability, security, development and invigoration for Africa is not only the longing of the African people; it is also the responsibility of the international community. China stands ready to work with other international partners to support Africa in pursuing peace and development. China welcomes and supports all initiatives that meet Africa's interests, and believes that it should be the same with the wider international community. No one could stand in the way or obstruct international efforts to support Africa's development.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
当今世界正在经历百年未有之大变局。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，全球治理体系和国际秩序变革加速推进，新兴市场国家和发展中国家快速崛起，国际力量对比更趋均衡，世界各国人民的命运从未像今天这样紧紧相连。
Our world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century: the surging trend toward multi-polarity, economic globalization, IT application and cultural diversity, accelerated transformation of the global governance system and international order, rapid rise of emerging markets and developing countries, and greater balance in global power configuration. The well-being of people in all countries has never been so closely intertwined as it is today.
同时，我们也面临前所未有的挑战。霸权主义、强权政治依然存在，保护主义、单边主义不断抬头，战乱恐袭、饥荒疫情此伏彼现，传统安全和非传统安全问题复杂交织。
On the other hand, we also face challenges unseen before. Hegemony and power politics persist; protectionism and unilateralism are mounting; war, conflicts, terrorism, famine and epidemics continue to plague us; security challenges, both traditional and non-traditional, remain as complex and interwoven as ever.
我们坚信，和平与发展是当今时代的主题，也是时代的命题，需要国际社会以团结、智慧、勇气，扛起历史责任，解答时代命题，展现时代担当。
However, we are firm in our conviction that peace and development remain the underlying trend of our times. Indeed, they are the call of the times. The international community should take our historical responsibility and respond to the call of our times with solidarity, vision, courage and a sense of mission.
——面对时代命题，中国把为人类作出新的更大贡献作为自己的使命。中国愿同世界各国携手构建人类命运共同体，发展全球伙伴关系，拓展友好合作，走出一条相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的国与国交往新路，让世界更加和平安宁，让人类生活更加幸福美好。
-- To respond to the call of the times, China takes it its mission to make new and even greater contribution to mankind. China will work with other countries to build a community with a shared future for mankind, forge partnerships across the world, enhance friendship and cooperation, and explore a new path of growing state-to-state relations based on mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation. Our goal is to make the world a place of peace and stability and life happier and more fulfilling for all.
——面对时代命题，中国愿同国际合作伙伴共建“一带一路”。我们要通过这个国际合作新平台，增添共同发展新动力，把“一带一路”建设成为和平之路、繁荣之路、开放之路、绿色之路、创新之路、文明之路。
-- To respond to the call of the times, China is ready to jointly promote the Belt and Road Initiative with international partners. We hope to create new drivers to power common development through this new platform of international cooperation; and we hope to turn it into a road of peace, prosperity, openness, green development and innovation and a road that brings together different civilizations.
——面对时代命题，中国将积极参与全球治理，秉持共商共建共享全球治理观。中国始终是世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者，支持扩大发展中国家在国际事务中的代表性和发言权，支持补强全球治理体系中的南方短板，支持汇聚南南合作的力量，推动全球治理体系更加平衡地反映大多数国家特别是发展中国家的意愿和利益。
-- To respond to the call of the times, China will get actively involved in global governance and stay committed to the vision of consultation, cooperation and benefit for all in global governance. China has all along played its part in promoting world peace and development and upholding the international order. We call for increasing the representation and voice of developing countries in international affairs and support efforts to strengthen the South, a weak link in the global governance system, as well as efforts to create synergy in South-South cooperation. We will continue the efforts to make the global governance system better represent the will and interests of the majority of countries, especially developing countries.
——面对时代命题，中国坚定不移坚持对外开放。面对世界经济增长的不稳定性不确定性，中国坚持走开放融通、合作共赢之路，坚定维护开放型世界经济和多边贸易体制，反对保护主义、单边主义，把自己囚于自我封闭的孤岛没有前途！
-- To respond to the call of the times, China will remain committed to opening-up. Facing uncertainty and unpredictability in global growth, China will continue to grow an open economy for win-win cooperation, and it will embrace an open world economy and the multilateral trading system and reject protectionism and unilateralism. No one who keeps himself in isolation on a single island will have a future.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
“海不辞水，故能成其大。”中国是世界上最大的发展中国家，非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆，中非早已结成休戚与共的命运共同体。我们愿同非洲人民心往一处想、劲往一处使，共筑更加紧密的中非命运共同体，为推动构建人类命运共同体树立典范。
To quote a Chinese saying, "The ocean is vast because it rejects no rivers." China, the world's largest developing country, and Africa, the continent with the largest number of developing countries, have long formed a community with a shared future. Indeed, we share a common stake. China will work with Africa to achieve our shared goal of building a closer China-Africa community with a shared future and turn it into a pacesetter for building such a community for mankind.
第一，携手打造责任共担的中非命运共同体。我们要扩大各层级政治对话和政策沟通，加强在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上的相互理解和支持，密切在重大国际和地区问题上的协作配合，维护中非和广大发展中国家共同利益。
First, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future to assume our joint responsibility. We could increase political and policy dialogue at various levels, enhance mutual understanding and support on issues involving each other's core interests and major concerns, and boost coordination on major international and regional issues. Such efforts will enable us to uphold the common interests of China and Africa as well as other developing countries.
第二，携手打造合作共赢的中非命运共同体。我们要抓住中非发展战略对接的机遇，用好共建“一带一路”带来的重大机遇，把“一带一路”建设同落实非洲联盟《2063年议程》、联合国2030年可持续发展议程以及非洲各国发展战略相互对接，开拓新的合作空间，发掘新的合作潜力，在传统优势领域深耕厚植，在新经济领域加快培育亮点。
Second, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that pursues win-win cooperation. We could both seize the opportunity created by the complementarity between our respective development strategies and the major opportunities presented by the Belt and Road Initiative. We need to see to it that the Belt and Road Initiative and the AU Agenda 2063, the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the development programs of African countries better complement each other. With these efforts, we could expand areas of cooperation, unlock new cooperation potential, consolidate our traditional areas of cooperation, and foster new highlights of cooperation in the new economy.
第三，携手打造幸福共享的中非命运共同体。我们要把增进民生福祉作为发展中非关系的出发点和落脚点。中非合作要给中非人民带来看得见、摸得着的成果和实惠。长期以来，中非一直互帮互助、同舟共济，中国将为非洲减贫发展、就业创收、安居乐业作出新的更大的努力。
Third, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that delivers happiness for all of us. Making lives better for our people is what we aim to achieve in growing China-Africa relations; so we need to make sure our cooperation delivers real benefits to us both in China and in Africa. Mutual help and solidarity is what has defined China-Africa relations over the years. Going forward, China will do more to help Africa alleviate poverty, pursue development, increase employment and income, and better the lives of its people.
第四，携手打造文化共兴的中非命运共同体。我们都为中非各自灿烂的文明而自豪，也愿为世界文明多样化作出更大贡献。我们要促进中非文明交流互鉴、交融共存，为彼此文明复兴、文化进步、文艺繁荣提供持久助力，为中非合作提供更深厚的精神滋养。我们要扩大文化艺术、教育体育、智库媒体、妇女青年等各界人员交往，拉紧中非人民的情感纽带。
Fourth, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that enjoys cultural prosperity. Both China and Africa are proud of our splendid civilizations, and we are both ready to make greater contributions to promoting cultural diversity in the world. By enhancing exchanges, mutual learning and harmonious co-existence of our civilizations, we will inject lasting impetus into invigorating our civilizations and cultures, enriching our artistic creations, and provide rich cultural nourishment for China-Africa cooperation. With more people-to-people exchanges in culture and art, education, sports, and between our think tanks, the media, and women and young people, we will strengthen the bond between the people of China and Africa.
第五，携手打造安全共筑的中非命运共同体。历经磨难，方知和平可贵。中国主张共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观，坚定支持非洲国家和非洲联盟等地区组织以非洲方式解决非洲问题，支持非洲落实“消弭枪声的非洲”倡议。中国愿为促进非洲和平稳定发挥建设性作用，支持非洲国家提升自主维稳维和能力。
Fifth, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that enjoys common security. People that have gone through adversity value peace most. China champions a new vision of security featuring common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We firmly support African countries and the African Union as well as other regional organizations in Africa in solving African issues in the African way, and we support the African initiative of "Silence the Guns in Africa". China is ready to play a constructive role in promoting peace and stability in Africa and will support African countries to strengthen their independent capacity for safeguarding stability and peace.
第六，携手打造和谐共生的中非命运共同体。地球是人类唯一的家园。中国愿同非洲一道，倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的发展方式，共同保护青山绿水和万物生灵。中国愿同非洲加强在应对气候变化、应用清洁能源、防控荒漠化和水土流失、保护野生动植物等生态环保领域交流合作，让中国和非洲都成为人与自然和睦相处的美好家园。
Sixth, let us build a China-Africa community with a shared future that promotes harmony between man and nature. The Earth is the only place which we mankind call home. China will work with Africa to pursue green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable development and protect our lush mountains and lucid waters and all living beings on our planet. We will strengthen exchange and cooperation with Africa on climate change, clean energy, prevention and control of desertification and soil erosion, protection of wildlife and other areas of ecological and environmental preservation. Together, we could make China and Africa beautiful places for people to live in harmony with nature.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
2015年中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会以来，中国全面落实约翰内斯堡峰会上确定的中非“十大合作计划”：一大批铁路、公路、机场、港口等基础设施以及经贸合作区陆续建成或在建设之中，中非和平安全、科教文卫、减贫惠民、民间交往等合作深入推进，中国承诺提供的600亿美元资金支持都已兑现或作出安排。“十大合作计划”给中非人民带来丰硕成果，展现了中非共同的创造力、凝聚力、行动力，将中非全面战略合作伙伴关系成功推向新的高度。
Since the 2015 FOCAC Johannesburg Summit, China has fully implemented the ten cooperation plans adopted at the Summit. A large number of railway, highway, airport, port and other infrastructure projects as well as a number of economic and trade cooperation zones have been built or are under construction. Our cooperation on peace and security, science, education, culture, health, poverty reduction, and people-to-people interactions has deepened. The US$60 billion financing pledged by China has been either delivered or arranged. These ten cooperation plans have brought huge benefits to the African and Chinese peoples. They have fully demonstrated the creativity, rallying power and efficiency of China-Africa cooperation, and lifted China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership to new heights.
中国愿以打造新时代更加紧密的中非命运共同体为指引，在推进中非“十大合作计划”基础上，同非洲国家密切配合，未来3年和今后一段时间重点实施“八大行动”：
To build an even closer China-Africa community with a shared future in the new era, China will, on the basis of the ten cooperation plans already adopted, launch eight major initiatives in close collaboration with African countries in the next three years and beyond.
一是实施产业促进行动。中国决定在华设立中国－非洲经贸博览会；鼓励中国企业扩大对非投资，在非洲新建和升级一批经贸合作区；支持非洲在2030年前基本实现粮食安全，同非洲一道制定并实施中非农业现代化合作规划和行动计划，实施50个农业援助项目，向非洲受灾国家提供10亿元人民币紧急人道主义粮食援助，向非洲派遣500名高级农业专家，培养青年农业科研领军人才和农民致富带头人；支持成立中国在非企业社会责任联盟；继续加强和非洲国家本币结算合作，发挥中非发展基金、中非产能合作基金、非洲中小企业发展专项贷款作用。
First, China will launch an industrial promotion initiative. We have decided to open a China-Africa economic and trade expo in China; we encourage Chinese companies to increase investment in Africa, and will build and upgrade a number of economic and trade cooperation zones in Africa. We will support Africa in achieving general food security by 2030, work with Africa to formulate and implement a program of action to promote China-Africa cooperation on agricultural modernization. We will implement 50 agricultural assistance programs, provide RMB 1 billion of emergency humanitarian food assistance to African countries affected by natural disasters, send 500 senior agriculture experts to Africa, and train young researchers in agri-science and entrepreneurs in agri-business. We will support Chinese companies in Africa to forge alliance of corporate social responsibilities. We will continue to strengthen cooperation with African countries in local currency settlement and make good use of the China-Africa Development Fund, the China-Africa Fund for Industrial Cooperation and the Special Loan for the Development of African SMEs.
二是实施设施联通行动。中国决定和非洲联盟启动编制《中非基础设施合作规划》；支持中国企业以投建营一体化等模式参与非洲基础设施建设，重点加强能源、交通、信息通信、跨境水资源等合作，同非方一道实施一批互联互通重点项目；支持非洲单一航空运输市场建设，开通更多中非直航航班；为非洲国家及其金融机构来华发行债券提供便利；在遵循多边规则和程序的前提下，支持非洲国家更好利用亚洲基础设施投资银行、新开发银行、丝路基金等资源。
Second, China will launch an infrastructure connectivity initiative. We have decided to jointly formulate a China-Africa infrastructure cooperation plan with the African Union. We will support Chinese companies in participating in Africa's infrastructure development by way of investment-construction-operation or through other models, with focus on enhancing cooperation on energy, transport, information, telecommunications and cross-border water resources. We will work with Africa to undertake a number of key connectivity projects. We will support Africa in developing the Single African Air Transport Market and open more direct flights between China and Africa. We will facilitate bond issuance by African countries and their financial institutions in China. On the basis of following multilateral rules and procedures, we will support African countries in making better use of financing resources of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the New Development Bank, and the Silk Road Fund.
三是实施贸易便利行动。中国决定扩大进口非洲商品特别是非资源类产品，支持非洲国家参加中国国际进口博览会，免除非洲最不发达国家参展费用；继续加强市场监管及海关方面交流合作，为非洲实施50个贸易畅通项目；定期举办中非品牌面对面活动；支持非洲大陆自由贸易区建设，继续同非洲有意愿的国家和地区开展自由贸易谈判；推动中非电子商务合作，建立电子商务合作机制。
Third, China will launch a trade facilitation initiative. We have decided to increase imports, particularly non-resource products, from Africa. We support African countries in participating in the China International Import Expo. The least developed African countries participating in it will be exempted from paying exhibition stand fees. We will continue to strengthen exchanges and cooperation on market regulation and between customs authorities, and implement 50 trade facilitation programs for Africa. We will hold, on a regular basis, marketing activities for Chinese and African brand products. We support the building of the African Continental Free Trade Area and will continue to hold free trade negotiations with interested African countries and regions. And we will set up relevant mechanisms to promote e-commerce cooperation with Africa.
四是实施绿色发展行动。中国决定为非洲实施50个绿色发展和生态环保援助项目，重点加强在应对气候变化、海洋合作、荒漠化防治、野生动物和植物保护等方面的交流合作；推进中非环境合作中心建设，加强环境政策交流对话和环境问题联合研究；开展中非绿色使者计划，在环保管理、污染防治、绿色经济等领域为非洲培养专业人才；建设中非竹子中心，帮助非洲开发竹藤产业；开展环境保护宣传教育合作。
Fourth, we will launch a green development initiative. We have decided to undertake 50 projects for green development and ecological and environmental protection in Africa to expand exchanges and cooperation with Africa on climate change, ocean, desertification prevention and control, and wildlife protection. A China-Africa environmental cooperation center will be set up, and more policy dialogue and joint research on environmental issues will be conducted. The China-Africa Green Envoys Program will be implemented to strengthen Africa's human capacity for environmental management, pollution prevention and control, and green development. A China-Africa bamboo center will be established to help Africa make bamboo and rattan products. China will also work with Africa to raise public awareness of environmental protection.
五是实施能力建设行动。中国决定同非洲加强发展经验交流，支持开展经济社会发展规划方面合作；在非洲设立10个鲁班工坊，向非洲青年提供职业技能培训；支持设立旨在推动青年创新创业合作的中非创新合作中心；实施头雁计划，为非洲培训1000名精英人才；为非洲提供5万个中国政府奖学金名额，为非洲提供5万个研修培训名额，邀请2000名非洲青年来华交流。
Fifth, we will launch a capacity building initiative. China will share more of its development practices with Africa and support cooperation with Africa on economic and social development planning. Ten Luban Workshops will be set up in Africa to provide vocational training for young Africans. China will support opening of a China-Africa innovation cooperation center to promote youth innovation and entrepreneurship. A tailor-made program will be carried out to train 1,000 high-caliber Africans. China will provide Africa with 50,000 government scholarships and 50,000 training opportunities for seminars and workshops, and will invite 2,000 young Africans to visit China for exchanges.
六是实施健康卫生行动。中国决定优化升级50个医疗卫生援非项目，重点援建非洲疾控中心总部、中非友好医院等旗舰项目；开展公共卫生交流和信息合作，实施中非新发再发传染病、血吸虫、艾滋病、疟疾等疾控合作项目；为非洲培养更多专科医生，继续派遣并优化援非医疗队；开展“光明行”、“爱心行”、“微笑行”等医疗巡诊活动；实施面向弱势群体的妇幼心连心工程。
Sixth, we will launch a health care initiative. China has decided to upgrade 50 medical and health aid programs for Africa, particularly flagship projects such as the headquarters of the African Center for Disease Control and Prevention and China-Africa Friendship Hospitals. Exchange and information cooperation will be carried out on public health. Cooperation programs will be launched on the prevention and control of emerging and re-emerging communicable diseases, schistosomiasis, HIV/AIDS and malaria. China will train more medical specialists for Africa and continue to send medical teams that better meet Africa's needs. More mobile medical services will be provided to patients for the treatment of cataract, heart disease and dental defects. And targeted health care services will be provided to women and children of vulnerable groups in Africa.
七是实施人文交流行动。中国决定设立中国非洲研究院，同非方深化文明互鉴；打造中非联合研究交流计划增强版；实施50个文体旅游项目，支持非洲国家加入丝绸之路国际剧院、博物馆、艺术节等联盟；打造中非媒体合作网络；继续推动中非互设文化中心；支持非洲符合条件的教育机构申办孔子学院；支持更多非洲国家成为中国公民组团出境旅游目的地。
Seventh, we will launch a people-to-people exchange initiative. China decided to establish an institute of African studies to enhance exchanges with Africa on civilization. The China-Africa Joint Research and Exchange Plan will be upgraded. Fifty joint cultural, sports and tourism events will be organized. China welcomes Africa's participation in the Silk Road International League of Theaters, the Silk Road International Museum Alliance and the Network of Silk Road Art Festivals. A China-Africa media cooperation network will be established. More African culture centers will be opened in China and more Chinese culture centers in Africa. Qualified African educational institutes are welcome to host Confucius Institutes. More African countries are welcome to become destinations for Chinese tour groups.
八是实施和平安全行动。中国决定设立中非和平安全合作基金，支持中非开展和平安全和维和维稳合作，继续向非洲联盟提供无偿军事援助。支持萨赫勒、亚丁湾、几内亚湾等地区国家维护地区安全和反恐努力；设立中非和平安全论坛，为中非在和平安全领域加强交流提供平台；在共建“一带一路”、社会治安、联合国维和、打击海盗、反恐等领域推动实施50个安全援助项目。
Eighth, we will launch a peace and security initiative. China decided to set up a China-Africa peace and security fund to boost our cooperation on peace, security, peacekeeping, and law and order. China will continue to provide military aid to the AU, and will support countries in the Sahel region and those bordering the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf of Guinea in upholding security and combating terrorism in their regions. A China-Africa peace and security forum will be established as a platform for conducting more exchanges in this area. Fifty security assistance programs will be launched to advance China-Africa cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative, and in areas of law and order, UN peacekeeping missions, fighting piracy and combating terrorism.
为推动“八大行动”顺利实施，中国愿以政府援助、金融机构和企业投融资等方式，向非洲提供600亿美元支持，其中包括：提供150亿美元的无偿援助、无息贷款和优惠贷款；提供200亿美元的信贷资金额度；支持设立100亿美元的中非开发性金融专项资金和50亿美元的自非洲进口贸易融资专项资金；推动中国企业未来3年对非洲投资不少于100亿美元。同时，免除与中国有外交关系的非洲最不发达国家、重债穷国、内陆发展中国家、小岛屿发展中国家截至2018年底到期未偿还政府间无息贷款债务。
To make sure that these eight initiatives are implemented on the ground, China will extend US$60 billion of financing to Africa in the form of government assistance as well as investment and financing by financial institutions and companies. This will include US$15 billion of grants, interest-free loans and concessional loans, US$20 billion of credit lines, the setting up of a US$10 billion special fund for development financing and a US$5 billion special fund for financing imports from Africa. We encourage Chinese companies to make at least US$10 billion of investment in Africa in the next three years. In addition, for those of Africa's least developed countries, heavily indebted and poor countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing countries that have diplomatic relations with China, the debt they have incurred in the form of interest-free Chinese government loans due to mature by the end of 2018 will be exempted.
各位同事、女士们、先生们！
Dear Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
青年是中非关系的希望所在。我提出的中非“八大行动”倡议中，许多措施都着眼青年、培养青年、扶助青年，致力于为他们提供更多就业机会、更好发展空间。去年10月，我同南南合作与发展学院的留华学生互致书信，他们中绝大多数来自非洲。我在信中勉励他们坚持学以致用，行远升高，积厚成器，为推动中非合作和南南合作谱写新篇章。
The future of China-Africa relations lies in our young people. Many of the measures in the eight initiatives I just outlined are designed to help young people in Africa. These measures will provide young Africans with more training and job opportunities and open up more space for their development. Last October, I wrote back to the exchange students of the Institute of South-South Cooperation and Development. Most of them were from Africa. I encouraged them to make the best of what they have learned, aim high, and keep working hard to promote China-Africa cooperation and South-South cooperation. I believe they have new roles to play and new accomplishments to make in this regard.
“红日初升，其道大光。”我相信，只要中非友好的接力棒能够在青年一代手中不断相传，中非命运共同体就一定会更具生机活力，中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦和非洲人民团结振兴的非洲梦就一定能够早日实现！
"The red rising sun will light up the road ahead." I am confident that the baton of China-Africa friendship will be passed from one generation to the next and that China and Africa, working together, will build an even more vibrant community with a shared future. The day will surely come when the Chinese nation realizes its dream of national renewal and Africa realizes its dream of unity and invigoration!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
40. 习近平在APEC第26次领导人非正式会议上的讲话
把握时代机遇　共谋亚太繁荣
Harnessing Opportunities of Our Times
To Jointly Pursue Prosperity in the Asia-Pacific
——在亚太经合组织第二十六次领导人非正式会议上的发言
（2018年11月18日，莫尔兹比港）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 26th APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting
Port Moresby, 18 November 2018 
尊敬的奥尼尔总理，
各位同事：
Honorable Prime Minister Peter O'Neill,
Dear Colleagues, 
很高兴同大家相聚在美丽的莫尔兹比港。亚太经合组织成员领导人首次在太平洋岛国地区聚首，围绕“把握包容性机遇，拥抱数字化未来”的主题，回顾合作历程，共商亚太愿景。我谨对巴布亚新几内亚政府特别是奥尼尔总理为筹备本次会议付出的努力，表示衷心的感谢！
It gives me great pleasure to join you in the beautiful city of Port Moresby. This is the first time for us APEC economic leaders to meet in the Pacific Islands region. We gather under the theme "Harnessing Inclusive Opportunities, Embracing the Digital Future" to review what we have achieved in our cooperation and chart the course for the future of the Asia-Pacific. I wish to thank the Papua New Guinean government and Prime Minister O'Neill in particular for the commendable efforts you have put in to host this meeting. 
当今世界，发展和变革风起云涌。新科技革命和产业变革深入发展，全球治理体系深刻重塑，国际格局加速演变。同时，全球发展深层次矛盾突出，保护主义、单边主义思潮抬头，多边贸易体制受到冲击，世界经济整体发展环境面临诸多风险和不确定性。
Our world is undergoing rapid development and changes. A new round of technological and industrial revolution is unfolding. The system of global governance is being profoundly reshaped; and the evolution of the international architecture is accelerating. On the other hand, global development faces acute deep-seated problems. Protectionism and unilateralism are resurfacing. The multilateral trading system is under assault. The global economic environment is fraught with risks and uncertainties. 
“智者顺时而谋。”站在历史前进的十字路口，我们应该认清世界大势，把握经济脉动，明确未来方向，解答时代命题。
As a line in the Chinese classics reads, "A man of vision sees the trend of the times and follows it." We have reached a crossroads of history, when we must have a keen appreciation of the trend of our world and take the pulse of the world economy. That is how we will be able to respond to the call of our time and chart our future course accordingly. 
第一，坚持推进区域经济一体化，构建开放型亚太经济。我们应该持续推进贸易和投资自由化便利化。通往亚太自由贸易区的路途不会平坦，但我们要始终朝着这个大方向、大目标迈进。对各类自由贸易安排，我们应该坚持开放、包容、透明原则，促进彼此协调，实现良性互动。我们应坚定维护以规则为基础的多边贸易体制，旗帜鲜明抵制保护主义。世界贸易组织正在探讨新一轮改革，改革的目的应该是让其更好发挥作用，坚持多边贸易体制的核心价值和基本原则，而不是推倒重来。我们应该引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
First, we need to advance economic integration in our region so as to build an open economy in the Asia-Pacific. We should continue to promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation. The road toward a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) will not be smooth. Yet, we need to remain committed to this goal and move toward it. We need to adopt an open, inclusive and transparent approach to the various kinds of free trade arrangements to ensure coordinated and positive interactions among them. We need to firmly uphold the rules-based multilateral trading system and say no to protectionism. The World Trade Organization is exploring a new round of reform. Such reform should be designed to enable the WTO to better play its role and uphold the core values and underlying principles of the multilateral trading system instead of having the Organization overhauled. What we need is to make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial for all. 
今年是中国改革开放40周年。中国将坚定不移全面深化改革，加快完善社会主义市场经济体制，建设现代化经济体系。中国将坚持对外开放基本国策，大幅度放宽市场准入，加大保护知识产权力度，创造更具吸引力的投资和营商环境。一周前，首届中国国际进口博览会在上海成功举行，吸引了172个国家、地区和国际组织，3600多家企业参展，40多万名境内外采购商到会洽谈采购，成交额达到578亿美元。4500多名各界知名人士出席虹桥国际经贸论坛。这再次表明，中国支持自由开放贸易、主动向世界开放市场的决心不会有任何动摇。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up initiative. China will pursue with resolve continued reform across the board. We will speed up efforts to improve our socialist market economy and put in place a modern economic system. China will continue to pursue its fundamental policy of opening-up by significantly expanding market access, better protecting intellectual property rights, and making our investment and business environment more attractive. The first China International Import Expo, which was successfully concluded in Shanghai just a week ago, was attended by 172 countries, regions and international organizations, and 3,600-plus companies and over 400,000 Chinese and foreign buyers who sealed 57.8 billion U.S. dollars worth of deals. The Hongqiao International Economic and Trade Forum held alongside the Expo was attended by over 4,500 leading personages from various sectors. This sent one more message about China's strong commitment to support free and open trade and to voluntarily open its market to the world. 
第二，坚持创新驱动，培育增长新动能。数字经济是亚太乃至全球未来的发展方向。我们应该牢牢把握创新发展时代潮流，全面平衡落实《互联网和数字经济路线图》，释放数字经济增长潜能。同时，我们应该加强数字基础设施和能力建设，增强数字经济可及性，消弭数字鸿沟，让处于不同发展阶段的成员共享数字经济发展成果，让亚太地区人民搭上数字经济发展快车。
Second, we need to pursue innovation-driven growth and foster new growth drivers. Digital economy represents the development of the future for both the Asia-Pacific and the world at large. We need to recognize and follow the trend of innovation-driven development as a trend of the times, and fully implement the Internet and Digital Economy Roadmap in a balanced way, so as to unleash the growth potential of digital economy. We need to promote the building of digital infrastructure and capacity, make digital economy more accessible and bridge the digital divide. Our goal should be for the benefits of digital economy to reach all member economies at different stages of development and for the people of the Asia-Pacific to get aboard the fast train of a growing digital economy. 
中国正在大力建设“数字中国”，在“互联网+”、人工智能等领域收获一批创新成果。分享经济、网络零售、移动支付等新技术新业态新模式不断涌现，深刻改变了中国老百姓生活。中国愿同亚太各方深化数字经济合作，培育更多利益契合点和经济增长点，为亚太经济注入强大新动能。
China is endeavoring to build a "Digital China". Many innovations have been made in areas such as Internet Plus and artificial intelligence. New technologies and new forms and models of business like sharing economy, online retail, and mobile payment continue to emerge in China, bringing profound changes to the lives of the Chinese people. China seeks deeper cooperation on digital economy with other members of the Asia-Pacific so as to expand convergence of interests and create more growth areas, thus adding strong and fresh impetus to the Asia-Pacific economy. 
第三，坚持完善互联互通网络，促进包容联动发展。互联互通是实现包容联动发展的基础。我们应该深入落实互联互通蓝图，让联通的网络覆盖太平洋沿岸的每一个角落。我们应该以2030年可持续发展议程为引领，采取更多务实举措，让发展更加均衡、增长更可持续、机会更加平等、社会更加包容。
Third, we need to improve the connectivity network to promote inclusive and interconnected development. Connectivity is the foundation of inclusive and interconnected development. Efforts are required to turn our connectivity blueprint into reality and extend our connectivity network to every corner along the Pacific shores. We need to take the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as a guide and adopt more concrete steps to make development more balanced, growth more sustainable, opportunities more equal and societies more inclusive. 
中国高度重视互联互通建设。经过5年努力，共建“一带一路”正进入深入发展新阶段。明年4月，中国将主办第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛。中国将同各国一道，坚持共商共建共享，高质量、高标准、高水平建设“一带一路”，为亚太和世界各国人民创造更大发展机遇。
China takes it a high priority to strengthen connectivity. Thanks to five years of joint efforts, cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative has entered a new phase of full implementation. China will host the second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation in April next year. China will work with all countries involved under the principle of consultation and collaboration for shared benefits to pursue the Belt and Road Initiative against high standards so that it will deliver quality outcomes and create even greater development opportunities for the people in the Asia-Pacific and beyond. 
第四，坚持深化伙伴关系，携手应对共同挑战。亚太经合组织走过近30年合作历程，互信、包容、合作、共赢的伙伴关系已经成为我们的共同财富。亚太各国国情千差万别，有分歧并不奇怪。关键是要坚持共谋发展这个公约数，发扬伙伴精神，协商处理分歧，探索解决共同挑战。我们应该立足多样性实际，尊重彼此选择的发展道路，在开放包容的基础上交融互鉴，在良性竞争的同时互利合作，共同构建亚太命运共同体。
Fourth, we need to forge a closer partnership and jointly meet common challenges. APEC has traversed a journey of cooperation for close to 30 years; and it has fostered a partnership featuring mutual trust, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, something we all hold dear. As we Asia-Pacific countries vary in national conditions, differences among us are normal. What is important is for us to stay committed to the shared goal of common development, address differences through consultation and explore solutions to common challenges in the spirit of partnership. We need to respect diversity and each other's choices of development path, promote integration and mutual learning on the basis of openness and inclusiveness, and engage in both healthy competition and mutually beneficial cooperation. With these efforts, we can jointly build a community with a shared future in the Asia-Pacific. 
中国坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，践行创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念。过去几十年，中国7亿多人口摆脱贫困，将在2020年实现全面脱贫。中国经济对世界经济增长的贡献率一直保持在30%以上。同时正在加快从高速增长转向高质量发展。今年，消费对中国经济增长的贡献达到78%。中国经济长期稳定向好的总体势头会继续保持下去。
China follows a people-centered development philosophy and a new development vision that features innovative, coordinated, green and open development for the benefit of all. In the past few decades, China has lifted more than 700 million people out of poverty and will completely eliminate poverty by 2020. The Chinese economy has been contributing over 30 percent of the global growth for many years. Its shift from high-speed to high-quality growth is gathering pace. For one thing, consumption accounts for 78 percent of China's growth this year. The overall momentum of sustained and sound growth will continue. 
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues, 
作为亚太地区领导人，我们有责任登高望远，规划好亚太经合组织2020年后的合作愿景。我们应该顺应经济全球化发展大势，不为一时的困难所阻挡，继续秉持推动区域经济一体化宗旨，把握构建开放型世界经济大方向，努力保持亚太合作势头，稳步迈向更高水平。
As leaders of the Asia-Pacific, we share a common responsibility to chart the long-term development course for APEC and draw up a post-2020 vision. We should follow the underlying trend of economic globalization and prevail over difficulties as they arise. We should remain committed to our goal of economic integration in the region and work toward the direction of an open global economy. We should keep the momentum of Asia-Pacific cooperation and steadily bring it to a higher level. 
中国是亚太合作的积极倡导者和坚定践行者。中国的发展离不开同亚太各方的紧密合作，也为亚太发展拓展了广阔空间。中国将深入参与亚太合作进程，加大投入，同各方深化务实合作，为亚太地区发展繁荣作出新贡献！
China is a champion of Asia-Pacific cooperation and has taken concrete steps to promote cooperation on the ground. Close cooperation with other members of the Asia-Pacific is indispensable for China's development. China's development, on its part, offers broad opportunities of development for the Asia-Pacific. China will stay deeply engaged in the Asia-Pacific cooperation process, increase its input, deepen practical cooperation with other parties involved, and make new contribution to the development and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. 
谢谢大家。
Thank you!
54. 习近平在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十八次会议上的讲话
弘扬“上海精神”　构建命运共同体
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十八次会议上的讲话
（2018年6月10日，青岛）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Carrying Forward the Shanghai Spirit to Build a Community with a Shared Future 
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the 18th Meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of The Shanghai Cooperation Organization 
Qingdao, June 10, 2018
尊敬的各位同事：
Dear colleagues,
六月的青岛，风景如画。在这美好的时节，欢迎大家来到这里，出席上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十八次会议。早在2500多年前，中国古代伟大的思想家孔子就说：“有朋自远方来，不亦乐乎？”今天，孔子的故乡山东喜迎远道而来的各方贵宾，我们在这里共商上海合作组织发展大计，具有特殊意义。
In this lovely season of June, I am delighted to welcome all of you to the picturesque city of Qingdao for the 18th meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO). Over 2,500 years ago, Confucius, the great Chinese philosopher, had this to say: "What a joy to have friends coming from afar!" It is therefore of special significance that I host my distinguished guests in Shandong, the home province of Confucius, for a summit that will chart the future course for the SCO.
再过5天，上海合作组织将迎来17岁生日。抚今追昔，本组织走过了不平凡的发展历程，取得了重大成就。
In five days, the SCO will celebrate its 17th birthday, an occasion for us to review our organization's remarkable journey and important achievements.
17年来，我们以《上海合作组织宪章》、《上海合作组织成员国长期睦邻友好合作条约》为遵循，构建起不结盟、不对抗、不针对第三方的建设性伙伴关系。这是国际关系理论和实践的重大创新，开创了区域合作新模式，为地区和平与发展作出了新贡献。
Over the past 17 years, guided by the SCO Charter and the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation Between the Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, we have forged a constructive partnership featuring non-alliance, non-confrontation and not targeting any third party. In doing so, we have achieved a major breakthrough in the theories and practices of international relations, created a new model for regional cooperation, and made new contribution to peace and development in our region.
今天，上海合作组织是世界上幅员最广、人口最多的综合性区域合作组织，成员国的经济和人口总量分别约占全球的20%和40%。上海合作组织拥有4个观察员国、6个对话伙伴，并同联合国等国际和地区组织建立了广泛的合作关系，国际影响力不断提升，已经成为促进世界和平与发展、维护国际公平正义不可忽视的重要力量。
Today, the SCO stands as a comprehensive regional cooperation organization that covers the largest area and population in the world. Its members account for about 20 percent of the global economy and 40 percent of its population. The SCO has four observer states and six dialogue partners as well as extensive cooperation linkages with the United Nations and other international and regional organizations. With its ever rising international influence, the SCO has become an important force for promoting global peace and development and upholding international justice and fairness.
上海合作组织始终保持旺盛生命力、强劲合作动力，根本原因在于它创造性地提出并始终践行“上海精神”，主张互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展。这超越了文明冲突、冷战思维、零和博弈等陈旧观念，掀开了国际关系史崭新的一页，得到国际社会日益广泛的认同。
The SCO enjoys strong vitality and momentum of cooperation. This, in the final analysis, is attributed to the Shanghai Spirit, a creative vision initiated and followed through by the SCO that champions mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations and pursuit of common development. The Shanghai Spirit, transcending outdated concepts such as clash of civilizations, Cold War and zero-sum mentality, has opened a new page in the history of international relations and gained increasing endorsement of the international community.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
“孔子登东山而小鲁，登泰山而小天下”。面对世界大发展大变革大调整的新形势，为更好推进人类文明进步事业，我们必须登高望远，正确认识和把握世界大势和时代潮流。
Mencius, another ancient Chinese philosopher, aptly observed, "When Confucius looks down from the peak of the Dongshan Mountain, the local Kingdom of Lu comes into view; when he looks down from the peak of Mount Tai, the whole land comes into view." At a time when the world is undergoing major developments, transformation and adjustment, we must aim high and look far, and keep pace with the underlying trend of both the world and our times to push for more progress of human civilization.
尽管当今世界霸权主义和强权政治依然存在，但推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理方向发展的呼声不容忽视，国际关系民主化已成为不可阻挡的时代潮流。
While hegemony and power politics still persist in this world, the growing call for a more just and equitable international order must be heeded. Democracy in international relations has become an unstoppable trend of the times.
尽管各种传统和非传统安全威胁不断涌现，但捍卫和平的力量终将战胜破坏和平的势力，安全稳定是人心所向。
While various traditional and non-traditional security threats keep emerging, the force for peace will prevail, for security and stability are what people long for.
尽管单边主义、贸易保护主义、逆全球化思潮不断有新的表现，但“地球村”的世界决定了各国日益利益交融、命运与共，合作共赢是大势所趋。
While unilateralism, trade protectionism and backlash against globalization are taking new forms, in this global village of ours where countries' interests and future are so interconnected, the pursuit of cooperation for mutual benefit represents a surging trend.
尽管文明冲突、文明优越等论调不时沉渣泛起，但文明多样性是人类进步的不竭动力，不同文明交流互鉴是各国人民共同愿望。
While we keep hearing such rhetoric as the clash of civilizations or the superiority of one civilization over another, it is the diversity of civilizations that sustains human progress. Indeed, mutual learning between different cultures is a shared aspiration of all peoples.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
当前，世界发展既充满希望，也面临挑战，我们的未来无比光明，但前方的道路不会平坦。我们要进一步弘扬“上海精神”，破解时代难题，化解风险挑战。
The world today faces both opportunities and challenges. The road ahead, bumpy as it may be, will lead to a promising future. We should stay committed to the Shanghai Spirit, surmount difficulties, defuse risks and meet challenges head on.
——我们要提倡创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展观，实现各国经济社会协同进步，解决发展不平衡带来的问题，缩小发展差距，促进共同繁荣。
-- We should uphold innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development, achieve coordinated social and economic progress of various countries and resolve issues caused by unbalanced development. We should bridge the gap in development and promote shared prosperity.
——我们要践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，摒弃冷战思维、集团对抗，反对以牺牲别国安全换取自身绝对安全的做法，实现普遍安全。
-- We should pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We should reject the Cold War mentality and confrontation between blocs and oppose the practices of seeking absolute security of oneself at the expense of others, so as to achieve security of all.
——我们要秉持开放、融通、互利、共赢的合作观，拒绝自私自利、短视封闭的狭隘政策，维护世界贸易组织规则，支持多边贸易体制，构建开放型世界经济。
-- We should promote open and inclusive cooperation for win-win outcomes. We should reject self-centered, short-sighted and closed-door policies. We should uphold WTO rules and support the multilateral trading system so as to build an open world economy.
——我们要树立平等、互鉴、对话、包容的文明观，以文明交流超越文明隔阂，以文明互鉴超越文明冲突，以文明共存超越文明优越。
-- We should champion equality, mutual learning, dialogue and inclusiveness between civilizations. It is important that we overcome cultural misunderstanding, clash and supremacy through exchanges, mutual learning and coexistence.
——我们要坚持共商共建共享的全球治理观，不断改革完善全球治理体系，推动各国携手建设人类命运共同体。
-- We should follow the principle of achieving shared growth through discussion and collaboration in engaging in global governance. We should reform and improve the global governance system, and work with all other countries to build a community with shared future for humanity.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
“上海精神”是我们共同的财富，上海合作组织是我们共同的家园。我们要继续在“上海精神”指引下，同舟共济，精诚合作，齐心协力构建上海合作组织命运共同体，推动建设新型国际关系，携手迈向持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。为此，我愿提出以下建议。
The Shanghai Spirit is our shared asset, and the SCO is our shared home. We should, guided by the Shanghai Spirit, work closely to build an SCO community with a shared future, move toward a new type of international relations, and build an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace, universal security, and common prosperity. To this end, I would like to propose the following:
第一，凝聚团结互信的强大力量。我们要全面落实青岛宣言、长期睦邻友好合作条约实施纲要等文件，尊重各自选择的发展道路，兼顾彼此核心利益和重大关切，通过换位思考增进相互理解，通过求同存异促进和睦团结，不断增强组织的凝聚力和向心力。
First, we need to build up strength of unity and mutual trust. We should ensure full implementation of the Qingdao Declaration, the Outline for the Implementation of the Treaty on Long-Term Good-Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation, and other documents. We should respect each other's choice of development paths and accommodate each other's core interests and major concerns. We should enhance mutual understanding by putting ourselves in others' positions and boost harmony and unity by seeking common ground and setting aside differences. This will enhance the cohesion and appeal of our organization.
第二，筑牢和平安全的共同基础。我们要积极落实打击“三股势力”2019至2021年合作纲要，继续举行“和平使命”等联合反恐演习，强化防务安全、执法安全、信息安全合作。要发挥“上海合作组织－阿富汗联络组”作用，促进阿富汗和平重建进程。未来3年，中方愿利用中国－上海合作组织国际司法交流合作培训基地等平台，为各方培训2000名执法人员，强化执法能力建设。
Second, we need to strengthen the foundation for shared peace and security. We need to actively implement the 2019-2021 program of cooperation for combating "three evil forces" of terrorism, separatism and extremism, continue to conduct the "Peace Mission" and other joint counter-terrorism exercises, and enhance cooperation on defense security, law enforcement security and information security. We need to give full play to the role of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group to facilitate peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan. China offers to train 2,000 law enforcement officers for all parties in the next three years through China National Institute for SCO International Exchange and Judicial Cooperation and other platforms to enhance law enforcement capacity building.
第三，打造共同发展繁荣的强劲引擎。我们要促进发展战略对接，本着共商共建共享原则，推进“一带一路”建设，加快地区贸易便利化进程，加紧落实国际道路运输便利化协定等合作文件。中国欢迎各方积极参与今年11月将在上海举办的首届中国国际进口博览会。中国政府支持在青岛建设中国－上海合作组织地方经贸合作示范区，还将设立“中国－上海合作组织法律服务委员会”，为经贸合作提供法律支持。
Third, we need to build a powerful engine to achieve common development and prosperity. We should increase complementarity of our respective development strategies, continue to advance the Belt and Road cooperation under the principle of delivering shared benefits through extensive consultation and joint contribution, accelerate regional trade facilitation, and step up the implementation of the Agreement on International Road Transport Facilitation and other cooperation documents. China will welcome all parties to the first China International Import Expo to be held in Shanghai in November this year. The Chinese government supports building a demonstration area in Qingdao for China-SCO local economic and trade cooperation, and will set up a committee of legal services for SCO member states to provide legal support for business cooperation.
我宣布，中方将在上海合作组织银行联合体框架内设立300亿元人民币等值专项贷款。
In this connection, I hereby announce that China will set up an RMB 30 billion equivalent special lending facility within the framework of the SCO Inter-bank Consortium.
第四，拉紧人文交流合作的共同纽带。我们要积极落实成员国环保合作构想等文件，继续办好青年交流营等品牌项目，扎实推进教育、科技、文化、旅游、卫生、减灾、媒体等各领域合作。未来3年，中方将为各成员国提供3000个人力资源开发培训名额，增强民众对上海合作组织大家庭的了解和认同。中方愿利用风云二号气象卫星为各方提供气象服务。
Fourth, we need to forge closer ties through cultural and people-to-people exchanges. We should actively implement the outline for environmental protection cooperation and other documents, ensure the continued success of such well-recognized programs as the youth exchange camp, and secure solid progress in cooperation in education, science and technology, culture, tourism, health, disaster relief and media. In the next three years, China will provide 3,000 training opportunities of human resources development for SCO member states to enhance public understanding of and support for the SCO family. China offers to provide meteorological services to all parties using its Fengyun-2 weather satellites.
第五，共同拓展国际合作的伙伴网络。我们要强化同观察员国、对话伙伴等地区国家交流合作，密切同联合国等国际和地区组织的伙伴关系，同国际货币基金组织、世界银行等国际金融机构开展对话，为推动化解热点问题、完善全球治理作出贡献。
Fifth, we need to expand partnership networks of international cooperation. By intensifying exchanges and cooperation with SCO observer states, dialogue partners, and other countries in our region, by enhancing partnerships with the United Nations and other international and regional organizations, and by engaging in dialogue with the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and other international financial institutions, we can contribute our share to resolving hotspot issues and improving global governance.
各位同事！
Dear colleagues,
一年来，在各成员国大力支持和帮助下，中方完成了主席国工作，并举办了本次峰会。在这里，我向大家表示诚挚的谢意。中方愿同各成员国一道，本着积极务实、友好合作的精神，全面落实本次会议的共识，支持下一任主席国吉尔吉斯斯坦的工作，携手创造本组织更加光明的美好未来！
Thanks to the support and assistance of all the other SCO member states over the past year, China has completed its SCO presidency and hosted this summit. Here I wish to express my sincere thanks to you all. China will maintain active, practical and friendly cooperation with other SCO member states to ensure the full implementation of the consensus reached at this summit and support Kyrgyzstan in its SCO presidency. Let us join hands to create an even brighter future for the SCO!
谢谢各位。
Thank you.
36. 习近平在二十国集团领导人第十三次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
登高望远，牢牢把握世界经济正确方向
Look Beyond the Horizon and Steer the World Economy in the Right Direction
——在二十国集团领导人峰会第一阶段会议上的发言
（2018年11月30日，布宜诺斯艾利斯）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Session I of the G20 Summit
Buenos Aires, 30 November 2018 尊敬的马克里总统，
各位同事：
President Mauricio Macri,
Dear Colleagues, 
今年是国际金融危机发生10周年，也是二十国集团领导人峰会10周年。尽管世界经济整体保持增长，但危机的深层次影响仍未消除，经济增长新旧动能转换尚未完成，各类风险加快积聚。新一轮科技革命和产业变革引发深刻变化，贫富差距和社会矛盾压力不断增加。世界经济再一次面临历史性的选择。
It's been ten years since the global financial crisis broke out and the first G20 Summit was convened. Today, the global economy, while maintaining growth on the whole, is still not free from the underlying impacts of the crisis. Old growth drivers are yet to be replaced by new ones. Various risks are rapidly building up. The new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation are triggering profound changes, the wealth gap keeps widening, and social contradictions are growing. The world economy is facing another historical choice. 
“以史为鉴，可以知兴替。”二十国集团要从历史大势中把握规律，引领方向。人类发展进步大潮滚滚向前，世界经济时有波折起伏，但各国走向开放、走向融合的大趋势没有改变。产业链、价值链、供应链不断延伸和拓展，带动了生产要素全球流动，助力数十亿人口脱贫致富。各国相互协作、优势互补是生产力发展的客观要求，也代表着生产关系演变的前进方向。在这一进程中，各国逐渐形成利益共同体、责任共同体、命运共同体。无论前途是晴是雨，携手合作、互利共赢是唯一正确选择。这既是经济规律使然，也符合人类社会发展的历史逻辑。面对重重挑战，我们既要增强紧迫感，也要保持理性，登高望远，以负责任态度把握世界经济大方向。
An ancient Chinese philosopher observed that "Reviewing the past enables us to learn about the law governing the evolution of history." We G20 members must closely follow the underlying historical trend so as to chart the course for the future. In mankind's relentless quest for development and progress, the trend toward openness and integration among countries is unstoppable despite ups and downs in the global economy. The ever growing and expanding industrial chain, value chain and supply chain have boosted the flow of production factors across the world and led several billion people out of poverty and toward prosperity. Greater coordination and complementarity among countries meet the need of productivity growth. They will also shape the future of relations of production. In this process, countries are increasingly becoming a community with shared interests, shared responsibilities and a shared future. Going forward, win-win cooperation is the only choice for us, be it in good times or bad. This is dictated by the law of economics, and it is in keeping with the development of human history. Facing various challenges, we must have a stronger sense of urgency, be rational in approach and look beyond the horizon. We must fulfill our responsibility and steer the global economy in the right direction. 
保持世界经济稳定发展的共同需要催生了二十国集团。10年来，我们同舟共济、勠力同心，推动世界经济走出衰退深渊，走上了复苏增长的轨道。10年后，我们应该再次拿出勇气，展示战略视野，引领世界经济沿着正确轨道向前发展。
The G20 was born out of the international community's need to maintain stable growth of the global economy. Over the past decade, we have braced difficulties together, navigated the global economy out of recession and brought it back to the track of recovery and growth. Ten years later, let us work with the same courage and strategic vision and ensure that the global economy grows on the right track. 
第一，坚持开放合作，维护多边贸易体制。5年前，我第一次出席二十国集团领导人峰会，呼吁共同维护和建设开放型世界经济。现在看，这一任务更加迫切。二十国集团成员间月均新增贸易限制措施比半年前翻了一番，2018年全球货物贸易量增速可能下滑0.3%。我们应该坚定维护自由贸易和基于规则的多边贸易体制。中方赞成对世界贸易组织进行必要改革，关键是要维护开放、包容、非歧视等世界贸易组织核心价值和基本原则，保障发展中国家发展利益和政策空间。要坚持各方广泛协商，循序推进，不搞“一言堂”。
First, we should stay committed to openness and cooperation and uphold the multilateral trading system. Five years ago when I attended the G20 Summit for the first time, I called for joint efforts to uphold and build an open world economy. Five years on, this has obviously become an even more urgent task for us. The number of new trade restrictive measures applied on a monthly basis among G20 members has doubled compared with six months ago. In 2018, the growth of trade in goods may decline by 0.3 percent globally. We should firmly uphold free trade and the rules-based multilateral trading system. China supports necessary reform of the World Trade Organization, and believes that it is critical to uphold the WTO's core values and fundamental principles such as openness, inclusiveness and non-discrimination and ensure the development interests and policy space of developing countries. We need to conduct extensive consultation to achieve gradual progress instead of imposing one's position on others. 
第二，坚持伙伴精神，加强宏观政策协调。伙伴精神是二十国集团最宝贵的财富。无论遇到什么困难，二十国集团成员都应该团结一致，共克时艰。各方应该坚持财政、货币、结构性改革“三位一体”的政策工具，努力推动世界经济强劲、平衡、可持续、包容增长。加强政策协调，既是世界经济增长的客观需要，也是主要经济体理应担负的责任。发达经济体在采取货币和财政政策时，应该更加关注并努力减少对新兴市场国家和发展中国家的冲击。国际货币基金组织第十五轮份额总检查应该按期完成，国际货币体系应该继续朝着多元化方向迈进，要构筑更加牢固的全球金融安全网。
Second, we should forge strong partnership and step up macro policy coordination. Partnership is the most valuable asset of the G20. We G20 members should work together to surmount whatever difficulty that lies ahead. We should employ the three tools of fiscal and monetary policies and structural reform in a holistic way to ensure strong, balanced, sustainable and inclusive growth of the global economy. Strengthening policy coordination, which is essential for global growth, is also the due responsibility of major economies. Developed economies, when adopting monetary and fiscal policies, should give more consideration to and work to minimize the impact such policies may exert on emerging markets and developing economies. The IMF's 15th General Quota Review should be concluded on schedule. The international monetary system should become more diversified, and the global financial safety net should continue to be strengthened. 
第三，坚持创新引领，挖掘经济增长动力。世界经济数字化转型是大势所趋，新的工业革命将深刻重塑人类社会。我们既要鼓励创新，促进数字经济和实体经济深度融合，也要关注新技术应用带来的风险挑战，加强制度和法律体系建设，重视教育和就业培训。我们既要立足自身发展，充分发掘创新潜力，也要敞开大门，鼓励新技术、新知识传播，让创新造福更多国家和人民。为更好引领和适应技术创新，建议二十国集团将“新技术应用及其影响”作为一项重点工作深入研究，认真探索合作思路和举措。
Third, we should stay committed to innovation and create new momentum for growth. The global economy is embracing the trend of digital transformation, and the new round of industrial revolution will reshape human society in profound ways. We should encourage innovation and leverage the role of the digital economy in growing the real economy. We need to watch out for risks and challenges brought by the application of new technologies, and strengthen the legal and regulatory framework. And we need to do more to boost education and vocational training. We should give priority to achieving development through fully tapping our innovation potential. At the same time, we also need to keep our doors open and encourage the spread of new technologies and knowledge so that innovation will benefit more countries and peoples. To better adapt to and guide technological innovation, I propose that the G20 carry out an in-depth study on the application and impact of new technologies on a priority basis to explore new thinking and new ways of cooperation in this area. 
第四，坚持普惠共赢，促进全球包容发展。当今世界面临的很多问题，归根结底都和发展问题相关。发展也是实现公平公正的强有力支撑。我们要坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，将人民的获得感、幸福感、安全感作为工作出发点和落脚点。要继续把发展问题置于全球宏观政策协调的突出位置，落实好2030年可持续发展议程，为联合国框架内有关工作提供有力支持。要维护发展中国家发展利益和空间，支持世界经济真正公平发展。要继续支持非洲发展，帮助非洲加强基础设施建设和互联互通，推进新工业化进程。
Fourth, we should stay committed to win-win cooperation to promote inclusive global development. Development holds the key to many problems facing the world today. Development also provides a strong guarantee for greater equity and justice. We need to continue to follow a people-centered development philosophy and endeavor to deliver a sense of fulfillment, happiness and security to our people. We need to continue to prioritize development in global macro-policy coordination, implement in real earnest the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and give strong support to work in this area under the UN framework. We should protect the development interests and space of developing countries so as to ensure global growth that is truly equitable. We should continue to support Africa's development by helping Africa with its infrastructure and connectivity building and new industrialization. 
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues, 
今年是中国改革开放40周年。40年来，在国际社会支持下，中国人民通过不懈奋斗，取得了历史性发展成就。国际金融危机发生以来，中国经济对世界经济增长贡献率超过30%。中国下决心将减贫进行到底，到2020年彻底消除现行标准下的绝对贫困，这个目标一定会实现。中国得益于改革开放，中国将坚定不移沿着这条路走下去。前不久，中国成功举办首届国际进口博览会，赢得国际社会广泛赞誉。中国将继续深化市场化改革，保护产权和知识产权，鼓励公平竞争，主动扩大进口。今后，我们将每年举办中国国际进口博览会，向世界进一步敞开中国市场。在世界银行最新《营商环境报告》中，中国排名较前一年上升32位。我们将继续朝着这一方向不懈努力。中方希望各国共同营造自由、开放、包容、有序的国际经济大环境。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. During the past 40 years, with the support of the international community, we in China have forged ahead with perseverance and made historic achievements in development. In the years since the global financial crisis, China has contributed over 30 percent of global growth. China is firm in its resolve to eradicate poverty. Our goal is to eliminate absolute poverty as currently defined by 2020, and we have every confidence to meet this target. China owes its progress to reform and opening-up, and will continue to advance on this path. Earlier this month, the first China International Import Expo (CIIE) was successfully held, which was warmly received by the international community. China will continue to deepen market-oriented reform, protect property rights and IPR, encourage fair competition and do more to expand imports. The CIIE will be held annually as a way to further open China's market. In the latest World Bank Doing Business report, China moved up 32 places in the ease of doing business ranking from last year. China will continue to improve its business environment, and hopes that all countries will work together for a free, open, inclusive and orderly international economic environment. 
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
48. 习近平在金砖国家工商论坛上的讲话
顺应时代潮流 实现共同发展
——在金砖国家工商论坛上的讲话
（2018年7月25日，约翰内斯堡）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Keeping Abreast of the Trend of the Times to Achieve Common Development
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the BRICS Business Forum 
Johannesburg, 25 July 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的多哥总统福雷，
尊敬的马布扎副总统，
各位部长，
各位工商界朋友，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa of South Africa, 
Your Excellency President Faure Gnassingbe of Togo, 
Your Excellency Deputy President David Mabuza of South Africa, 
Ministers, 
Friends from the business community, 
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
下午好！很高兴再次来到“彩虹之国”，同大家相聚在风景秀丽的约翰内斯堡。5年前，我担任中国国家主席之后出席的首场国际峰会，就是在德班举行的金砖国家领导人第五次会晤。3年前，就在这座会议中心，我同非洲各国领导人一道出席了中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会。
Good afternoon! I am delighted to visit South Africa, the "rainbow nation," once again and meet you here in the beautiful city of Johannesburg. The first international summit I attended after taking office as Chinese president five years ago was the fifth BRICS Summit held in Durban. Three years ago, right here in this convention center, I attended the FOCAC Johannesburg Summit with African leaders.
时隔近3年，再次踏上非洲大陆，我深切感受到非洲大陆的蓬勃发展、欣欣向荣。
Nearly three years on, as I once again set foot on the African continent, I am struck by its robust growth and strong vitality.
2017年9月，在各方大力支持下，中国成功主办了金砖国家领导人厦门会晤。五国领导人一致决定深化战略伙伴关系，巩固经贸财金、政治安全、人文交流“三轮驱动”合作架构，确立“金砖+”合作理念，共同开创金砖合作第二个“金色十年”。
Thanks to the strong support of all participating parties, China successfully hosted the BRICS Xiamen Summit last September. We as BRICS leaders unanimously agreed to strengthen our strategic partnership, consolidate the cooperation architecture with its three main drivers, namely, economic cooperation, political and security cooperation, and people-to-people exchanges. We thus laid out a vision of BRICS+ cooperation and jointly ushered in the second Golden Decade of BRICS cooperation.
我听说，约翰内斯堡在恩古尼语中被称为“黄金之城”。在“黄金之城”勾画“金色十年”蓝图美景，再恰当不过了！我期待着同各位领导人一道，推动金砖合作从约翰内斯堡再出发，踏上新征程，完成新使命！
I understand that in the Nguni language, Johannesburg means the "Place of Gold." We cannot find a better place to chart the course for our Golden Decade than in this city of gold. Here in Johannesburg, I look forward to working with other BRICS leaders to embark on a new journey of BRICS cooperation and fulfill our new mission.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
金砖机制的诞生和发展，是世界经济变迁和国际格局演变的产物。在第一个10年里，金砖合作乘势而起，亮点纷呈。五国秉持开放包容、合作共赢金砖精神，推动各领域务实合作不断深入，深化了团结互信，增进了五国人民福祉，拉紧了利益和情感纽带，为世界经济企稳复苏并重回增长之路作出了突出贡献。
The BRICS mechanism owes its birth and growth to evolution of both the global economy and the international landscape. In its first decade, BRICS cooperation got off the ground and bore rich fruit. We five BRICS countries, guided by the BRICS spirit of openness, inclusiveness and win-win cooperation, have deepened our cooperation, enhanced our solidarity and mutual trust, improved the lives of our peoples, and made our bond of interests and friendship even closer. Indeed, our cooperation has contributed much to global economic recovery and growth.
当今世界正面临百年未有之大变局。对广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家而言，这个世界既充满机遇，也存在挑战。我们要在国际格局演变的历史进程中运筹金砖合作，在世界发展和金砖国家共同发展的历史进程中谋求自身发展，在“金色十年”里实现新的飞跃。
We are witnessing major changes unfolding in our world, something unseen in a century. This is a world of both opportunities and challenges for us emerging markets and developing countries. We should pursue BRICS cooperation in the historical process of global transformation, and we should promote the development of our own countries in the historical course of promoting the common development of both BRICS countries and other countries in the world, thus making new advances in the next Golden Decade.
——未来10年，将是世界经济新旧动能转换的关键10年。人工智能、大数据、量子信息、生物技术等新一轮科技革命和产业变革正在积聚力量，催生大量新产业、新业态、新模式，给全球发展和人类生产生活带来翻天覆地的变化。我们要抓住这个重大机遇，推动新兴市场国家和发展中国家实现跨越式发展。
-- The next decade will be a crucial one in which new global growth drivers will take the place of old ones. A new round of revolution and transformation in science, technology and industries featuring artificial intelligence, big data, quantum information and bio-technology are gaining momentum. They are giving birth to a large number of new industries and business forms and models and will fundamentally change global development and people's work and lives. We must seize this important opportunity to enable emerging markets and developing countries to achieve leapfrog development.
——未来10年，将是国际格局和力量对比加速演变的10年。新兴市场国家和发展中国家对世界经济增长的贡献率已经达到80%。按汇率法计算，这些国家的经济总量占世界的比重接近40%。保持现在的发展速度，10年后将接近世界总量一半。新兴市场国家和发展中国家群体性崛起势不可当，将使全球发展的版图更加全面均衡，使世界和平的基础更为坚实稳固。
-- The next decade will see faster changes in the international landscape and the international alignment of forces. Emerging markets and developing countries already contribute 80 percent of global economic growth. Based on exchange rate calculation, these countries account for nearly 40 percent of the global economic output. Growing at their current rates, these countries will see their economic output approach half of the global total in a decade. The collective rise of emerging markets and developing countries is unstoppable, and it will make global development more balanced and global peace more firmly based.
——未来10年，将是全球治理体系深刻重塑的10年。世界多极化、经济全球化在曲折中前行，地缘政治热点此起彼伏，恐怖主义、武装冲突的阴霾挥之不去。单边主义、保护主义愈演愈烈，多边主义和多边贸易体制受到严重冲击。要合作还是要对立，要开放还是要封闭，要互利共赢还是要以邻为壑，国际社会再次来到何去何从的十字路口。全球治理体系的走向，关乎各国特别是新兴市场国家和发展中国家发展空间，关乎全世界繁荣稳定。
-- The next decade will see a profound reshaping of the global governance system. The world is moving toward multi-polarity and greater economic globalization amid setbacks. Geopolitical hotspots keep emerging, and the dark shadow of terrorism and armed conflicts still haunts us. Unilateralism and protectionism are mounting, dealing a severe blow to multilateralism and the multilateral trading regime. The international community has reached a new crossroads; and we are facing a choice between cooperation and confrontation, between opening-up and a close-door policy, and between mutual benefit and a beggar-thy-neighbor approach. Thus, the evolution of global governance system will have a profound impact on the development of all countries, particularly emerging markets and developing countries, and indeed on the prosperity and stability of the whole world.
金砖国家要顺应历史大势，把握发展机遇，合力克服挑战，为构建新型国际关系、构建人类命运共同体发挥建设性作用。
We BRICS countries should keep abreast of the historical trend, seize development opportunities, jointly meet challenges, and play a constructive role in building a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，坚持合作共赢，建设开放经济。开放合作是科技进步和生产力发展的必然逻辑。贸易战不可取，因为不会有赢家。经济霸权主义更要不得，因为这将损害国际社会共同利益，最终也将搬起石头砸自己的脚。
First, we should pursue win-win cooperation to build an open economy. Openness and cooperation are the sure way to achieve progress in science and technology and growth of productivity. A trade war should be rejected, because there will be no winner. Economic hegemony is even more objectionable, as it will undermine the collective interests of the international community; those who pursue this course will only end up hurting themselves.
在世界经济经历深刻调整变革之时，只有开放才能使不同国家相互受益、共同繁荣、持久发展，才是各国应当作出的明智选择。金砖国家要坚定建设开放型世界经济，旗帜鲜明反对单边主义和保护主义，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化，共同引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢方向发展。要让经济全球化的正面效应更多释放出来，帮助新兴市场国家和发展中国家，特别是非洲国家和最不发达国家有效参与国际产业分工，共享经济全球化的红利。
As the world economy is going through profound transition and changes, only by opening themselves can different countries achieve mutual benefit, shared prosperity and sustainable development. This should be the right choice for all countries. We BRICS countries should firmly promote an open world economy, be resolute in rejecting unilateralism and protectionism, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and jointly steer the global economy toward greater openness, inclusiveness, balanced growth and win-win outcomes for all. We should ensure that economic globalization will deliver more benefits. We should help emerging markets and developing countries, African countries and the least developed countries in particular, fully involve themselves in international division of labor and share in the benefits of economic globalization.
第二，坚持创新引领，把握发展机遇。科技是第一生产力，为人类文明进步提供了不竭动力。人类曾经历农业文明、工业文明的数次飞跃，带来了社会生产力大发展，同时也伴生着蜕变的阵痛。今天，世界再次来到这样一个重要历史节点。在新一轮科技革命和产业变革大潮中，除旧布新必然导致产业变革，这个过程是艰难痛苦的。成功跨越蜕变，各国将得到发展新生机、新活力，给人民带来更好生活、更多福祉。
Second, we should pursue innovation and seize development opportunities. Science and technology, as the primary production forces, have provided inexhaustible power driving progress of human civilization. Humanity had made giant leaps forward as it progressed from an agricultural civilization to an industrial civilization, a process which created both huge gains in social productivity and growing pains. The world today has once again reached a critical historic juncture. In the unfolding new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation, new things will inevitably emerge and take the place of old ones. Indeed, this will be a difficult and painful process. But if countries succeed in seizing opportunities that have presented themselves, they will be able to achieve new dynamic growth and deliver better lives to their people.
在新科技带来的新机遇面前，每个国家都有平等发展权利。潮流来了，跟不上就会落后，就会被淘汰。我们能够做的和应该做的就是要抢抓机遇，加大创新投入，着力培育新的经济增长点，实现新旧动能转换。要全力推进结构性改革，消除一切不利于创新的体制机制障碍，充分激发创新潜能和市场活力。要树立全球视野，深化国际创新交流合作，发挥各自比较优势和资源禀赋，让科技进步惠及更多国家和人民。同时，我们要妥善化解信息化、自动化、智能化对传统产业的冲击，在培育新产业过程中创造新的就业机会。
In the face of new opportunities brought by new science and technology, every country has an equal right to development. Those who fail to keep abreast of the trend of the times will fall behind and become irrelevant. What we can and should do is to seize opportunities, increase input in innovation, focus on creating new areas of growth and replace old growth drivers with new ones. We should endeavor to advance structural reform, remove all institutional barriers to innovation and fully unlock innovation potential and energize the market. We should develop a global perspective, boost international exchanges and cooperation in innovation, and fully leverage each other's comparative strengths and resource endowment, so as to enable more countries and people to benefit from scientific and technological advances. At the same time, we should ease the impact of application of information technology, automation and smart technology on traditional industries and create new job opportunities in the process of fostering new industries.
第三，坚持包容普惠，造福各国人民。发展不平衡、不充分问题是各国面临的共同挑战。一方面，新兴市场国家和发展中国家同发达国家的南北差距仍很明显。另一方面，在各国内部，也都不同程度存在发展差距。
Third, we should pursue inclusive growth to deliver benefits to people of all countries. Uneven and insufficient development is a common challenge facing all countries. The North-South gap, namely, the gap between developed countries and emerging markets and developing countries, remains huge. And there are also development gaps of varying degrees within countries.
2030年可持续发展议程为国际社会提供了综合行动方案。金砖国家要立足自身国情，将2030年议程同本国发展战略深入对接，坚持以人民为中心，统筹经济、社会、环境发展，不断增强人民群众的获得感、幸福感。要坚持人与自然和谐共生，推动国际社会全面落实《巴黎协定》，加快构筑尊崇自然、绿色发展的生态体系。要积极推动国际发展合作，敦促发达国家履行官方发展援助承诺，增加对广大发展中国家的支持。
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides a comprehensive action plan for the international community. We BRICS countries should, basing ourselves on our actual national conditions, follow the guidance of the 2030 Agenda as we pursue our own development strategies. We should put people first, ensure coordinated economic and social development and protect the environment, thus giving our people a stronger sense of fulfillment and happiness. We should ensure harmony between man and nature and encourage the international community to fully implement the Paris Agreement. We should treat nature with awe and do more to foster an ecological system conducive to green development. It is necessary to promote international development cooperation, urge developed countries to fulfill their promises on official development assistance and increase support to developing countries.
非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆，也是全球最具发展潜力的地区。我们要加强对非合作，支持非洲发展，努力把金砖国家同非洲合作打造成南南合作的样板。具体合作中，应该结合自身实际，积极同非洲国家开展减贫、粮食安全、创新、基础设施建设、工业化等领域项目合作，帮助各国经济结构发展，为落实非盟《2063年议程》提供助力，让古老的非洲大地展现出旺盛生机活力。
Home to more developing countries than any other continent, Africa has more development potential than any other region in the world. We should strengthen cooperation with Africa, support its development and make BRICS-Africa cooperation a model for South-South cooperation. We should actively carry out cooperation with African countries in such areas as poverty reduction, food security, innovation, infrastructure development and industrialization in a way compatible with their national conditions. We should help African countries develop their economic structure, contribute to the implementation of Agenda 2063 of the African Union and thus enable Africa, an ancient continent, to gain strong vitality.
第四，坚持多边主义，完善全球治理。良好稳定的外部环境，是所有国家发展的重要前提，对新兴市场国家和发展中国家来说更是如此。现行国际秩序并不完美，但只要它以规则为基础，以公平为导向，以共赢为目标，就不能随意被舍弃，更容不得推倒重来。
Fourth, we should uphold multilateralism and improve global governance. An enabling and stable external environment is crucial for the development of all countries, especially emerging markets and developing countries. Obviously, the current international order is not a perfect one. But as long as it is rule-based, aims to be equitable and pursues win-win outcomes as its goal, such an international order should not be discarded at will, still less should it be dismantled and rebuilt all over again.
金砖国家要坚定奉行多边主义，敦促各方切实遵守共同制定的国际规则，坚持大小国家一律平等，大家的事商量着办，反对霸权主义和强权政治。要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，积极参与斡旋解决地缘政治热点问题。要坚定支持多边贸易体制，继续推进全球经济治理改革，提高新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权。不管是创新、贸易投资、知识产权保护等问题，还是网络、外空、极地等新疆域，在制定新规则时都要充分听取新兴市场国家和发展中国家意见，反映他们的利益和诉求，确保他们的发展空间。
We BRICS countries must uphold multilateralism. We should urge all parties to fully observe collectively adopted international rules, and we should treat all countries as equals regardless of their size, address issues that matter to all through consultation and oppose hegemony and power politics. We should promote common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, get actively involved in mediation efforts for resolving geopolitical hotspot issues. It is important for us to firmly support the multilateral trading regime, advance global economic governance reform and increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries. When new rules are made on such issues as innovation, trade and investment and intellectual property protection or on new frontiers including cyberspace, outer space or the polar regions, we should make sure that the views of emerging markets and developing countries are heeded, their interests and demands are taken into consideration, and there are sufficient opportunities for their development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
今年是中国改革开放40周年。艰难困苦，玉汝于成。40年来，中国走过了不平凡的历程，成功开辟了中国特色社会主义道路。中国人民立足国情，放眼世界，既从悠久的中华文明中汲取智慧，又博采东西方各国之长，不断走向世界、融入世界，在实现自身发展的同时，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出了重要贡献。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. Success only comes through hard work. During the past 40 years, China has come a long way. With strenuous efforts, China has blazed a path of building socialism with distinctive Chinese features. Proceeding from China's realities and developing a global vision, we in China have both drawn strength from the wisdom of the time-honored Chinese civilization and learned from other countries, both east and west. We have embraced the world and integrated our country fully into it. While pursuing its own development, China has also made important contribution to peace and development of mankind.
作为世界最大的发展中国家，我们将牢牢把握时代发展脉搏，深入贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享发展理念，加快推进创新驱动发展战略，深入参与国际创新和技术合作，积极开展南南合作，努力为新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同发展创造更大机遇。
As the world's biggest developing country, China will ride the trend of the times and pursue innovation-driven, coordinated, green and open development for all. We will step up efforts to pursue innovation-driven development and fully engage in international cooperation on innovation and technologies. We will take an active part in South-South cooperation to foster greater opportunities for common development of emerging markets and developing countries.
我们将继续敞开大门搞建设。在今年4月举行的博鳌亚洲论坛年会上，我宣布了一系列扩大开放新举措，这些举措正在快速落实。我们将继续创造更具吸引力的投资环境，加强同国际规则对接，增加透明度，坚持依法办事，鼓励竞争，反对垄断。我们将加强知识产权保护，加大执法力度，提高违法成本，鼓励企业间正常技术交流合作，保护所有企业合法知识产权。我们将主动扩大进口，促进经常项目收支平衡。
China will continue to develop itself with its door wide open. At the annual conference of the Boao Forum for Asia held last April, I announced a number of new initiatives to open China further, and these initiatives are being speedily pursued. China will build a more investment-friendly environment that is aligned with international standards, more transparent and law-based and encourages competition and opposes monopoly. China will take tough law enforcement steps to strengthen protection of intellectual property rights and make IPR infringement even more costly. We encourage companies to maintain normal technological exchanges and cooperation, and will see to it that their lawful intellectual property rights are protected. China will also increase imports to promote balance of payment under the current account.
今年11月，中国将在上海举办首届中国国际进口博览会。这是中方坚定支持贸易自由化、主动向世界开放市场的重大举措，将为各方进入中国市场搭建新的平台。目前，已有130多个国家和地区、2800多家企业确认参加博览会，预计到会国内外采购商将超过15万人。欢迎金砖国家和非洲国家工商界朋友赴华参会，共襄盛举。
China will host the first China International Import Expo in Shanghai this November, a major move to firmly support trade liberalization and open its market. The Expo will serve as a new platform for the world to access the Chinese market. By now, over 130 countries and regions and more than 2,800 companies have confirmed participation and over 150,000 buyers in and outside China are expected to attend this fair. I welcome business leaders from other BRICS and African countries to attend the Expo.
我们将继续大力推进“一带一路”建设，为各国经济社会发展、落实2030年议程开辟新空间。共建“一带一路”倡议秉持共商共建共享原则，源于中国，属于世界。我们真诚希望金砖国家、非洲国家、广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家加入共建“一带一路”伙伴网络，让共建“一带一路”成果惠及更多国家和人民。
China will continue to vigorously pursue the Belt and Road Initiative to create new opportunities of social and economic development for participating countries and for them to implement the UN 2030 Agenda. The Belt and Road Initiative, guided by the principle of seeking shared benefits through extensive consultation and joint contribution, originated in China but belongs to the world. It is our sincere hope that other BRICS countries, African countries and other emerging markets and developing countries will forge strong partnerships with this initiative so that its benefits will reach more countries and their peoples.
中国是非洲国家天然的好朋友、好兄弟、好伙伴，中非合作是南南合作的典范。今年9月，中方将和非洲国家共同举办中非合作论坛北京峰会。这次峰会将以“合作共赢，携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体”为主题，重点是把中非共建“一带一路”、 2030年议程、《2063年议程》同非洲各国发展战略结合起来，在更高质量、更高水平上实现中非合作共赢、共同发展。
China and African countries are destined to be good friends, good brothers and good partners, and China-Africa cooperation stands as a fine example of South-South cooperation. This coming September will see a reunion of China and African countries at the Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in Beijing. Themed on "China and Africa: Toward an Even Stronger Community with a Shared Future through Win-Win Cooperation," the Beijing Summit aims to enhance complementarity between China-Africa joint efforts to pursue the Belt and Road Initiative, the 2030 Agenda and the 2063 Agenda on the one hand and the development strategies of African countries on the other. This will enable China and Africa to pursue high quality and high standard cooperation for mutual benefit and common development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
经济合作是金砖合作最重要、成果最丰富的领域。今年在各方共同努力下，金砖经济合作迈出新步伐。我们将共同建设金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系，加强宏观经济政策协调，促进创新和工业化合作，联手加快经济新旧动能转换和转型升级。五国还在贸易便利化、服务贸易、电子商务、知识产权等方面深化合作，取得了积极成果。这些措施有利于我们在当今世界变局中抓住机遇、应对挑战，也有利于我们把金砖经济伙伴战略落到实处。
Business cooperation is the most important and fruitful aspect of BRICS cooperation. Thanks to our joint efforts, new advances have been made in this cooperation this year. We BRICS countries will forge a partnership on the new industrial revolution, which involves more coordination of macro economic policies, closer cooperation on innovation and industrialization and joint efforts to accelerate economic upgrading and the replacement of growth drivers. Our five BRICS countries have also made good progress in cooperation on trade facilitation, service trade, e-commerce, intellectual property rights and in other fields. These steps will enable us to seize opportunities and meet challenges in a changing world and enrich the BRICS Economic Partnership Strategy.
工商界是金砖经济合作的主力军、生力军。在开创第二个“金色十年”过程中，工商界大有可为。希望各位企业家朋友充分发挥各自优势，促进五国互利共赢，实现共同发展。希望你们勇于改革创新，敢于先行先试，为五国发展、为新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同发展闯出一片天地。希望你们密切结合人民实际需要，既追求经济效益，也注重社会效益，筑牢金砖合作民意基础。
The business community is the mainstay of BRICS economic cooperation and a dynamic force driving it. As business leaders, you have a great role to play in shaping the second Golden Decade of BRICS cooperation. I hope that you will fully leverage your strengths to enhance win-win cooperation for common development between our five countries. As business leaders, you should take bold steps to explore new ground in pursuing reform and innovation. And working together, you can surely open up new horizon for the development of our five countries and other emerging markets and developing countries. I also hope you will keep in mind the needs of the people and pursue both economic and social returns, so as to increase public support for BRICS cooperation.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and gentlemen, Friends,
今年是曼德拉先生诞辰100周年。他有一句名言：“攀上一座高山后，你会发现，还有更多的高山等着你去攀登。”金砖合作的历程，正是五国携手勇攀高峰、不断超越的历程。只要金砖国家携手同心，就能不断攀越险峰峭壁，登顶新的高峰、到达新的高度，为人类和平与发展的崇高事业作出新的更大的贡献！
This year marks the centenary of the birth of Nelson Mandela. Let me quote one of his famous sayings, "After climbing a great hill, one only finds that there are many more hills to climb." Indeed, the history of BRICS cooperation is a journey of our five countries climbing great hills only to reach new heights. I am convinced that when our five countries forge ahead together, we will scale new peaks, reach new heights, and make even greater contribution to peace and development of mankind.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
47. 习近平在金砖国家领导人约翰内斯堡会晤大范围会议上的讲话
让美好愿景变为现实
——在金砖国家领导人约翰内斯堡会晤大范围会议上的讲话
（2018年7月26日，约翰内斯堡）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Turn Our Vision into a Reality 
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Johannesburg Summit 
Johannesburg, 26 July 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的特梅尔总统，
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理：
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa, 
Your Excellency President Michel Temer,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin, 
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
首先，我要再次感谢拉马福萨总统和南非政府为这次会晤所作的热情周到安排。阔别5年之后，金砖国家领导人会晤再次走进非洲，是一件值得庆祝的事情。
Let me begin by thanking President Ramaphosa and the South African government for their warm hospitality and thoughtful arrangements. The BRICS Summit is convened in Africa again after a lapse of five years. This is an occasion to celebrate.
这次会晤的主题是“金砖国家在非洲：在第四次工业革命中共谋包容增长和共同繁荣”，很有现实意义。从18世纪第一次工业革命的机械化，到19世纪第二次工业革命的电气化，再到20世纪第三次工业革命的信息化，一次次颠覆性的科技革新，带来社会生产力的大解放和生活水平的大跃升，从根本上改变了人类历史的发展轨迹。
The theme of this summit - "BRICS in Africa: Collaborating for Inclusive Growth and Shared Prosperity in the 4th Industrial Revolution" - is most fitting under the current circumstances. The previous three industrial revolutions were all characterized by transformative advancement in science and technology: the rise of mechanization in the 18th century, the harnessing of electricity in the 19th century, and the advent of the Information Age in the 20th century. Such breakthroughs have greatly unleashed social productivity and significantly improved people's living standards, thus profoundly reshaping the course of human history.
如今，我们正在经历一场更大范围、更深层次的科技革命和产业变革。大数据、人工智能等前沿技术不断取得突破，新技术、新业态、新产业层出不穷。各国利益和命运紧密相连，深度交融。同时，世界经济新旧动能转换尚未完成，南北失衡等深层次、结构性问题还未消除。地缘政治冲突此起彼伏，保护主义和单边主义愈演愈烈，直接影响到新兴市场国家和发展中国家发展外部环境。
Today, we are experiencing another revolution in science, technology and industry, which is greater in scope and depth. Breakthroughs are being made in quick succession in frontier technologies like big data and artificial intelligence. New technologies, business models and industries are emerging one after another. Countries around the world have found their interests and future tied together like never before.
That said, we have yet to sustain global growth with new driving forces and to address the North-South imbalance and other deep-seated structural problems. What's more, constant flare-ups of geopolitical conflicts and the escalation of protectionism and unilateralism are directly affecting the external development environment of emerging markets and developing countries.
时代大潮奔腾不息，不以任何人的意志为转移。金砖国家要把握历史大势，深化战略伙伴关系，巩固“三轮驱动”合作架构，让第二个“金色十年”的美好愿景变为现实，携手迈向人类命运共同体。
History keeps surging forward independent of people's wish. We the BRICS countries must therefore have a keen grasp of the trend of our times, deepen our strategic partnership, and consolidate our cooperation framework underpinned by economic, political and security cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. This way, we will be able to turn our vision of a second "Golden Decade" into a reality, and together build a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，释放经济合作巨大潜力。加强经济合作、实现共同发展是金砖合作的初衷和主线，也是潜力最大、内容最丰富、成果最集中的领域。我们要加强贸易投资、财金、互联互通等领域合作，把合作蛋糕做大做实。要在联合国、二十国集团、世界贸易组织等框架内，坚定维护基于规则的多边贸易体制，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义。
First, we must unlock the enormous potential of our economic cooperation. Closer economic cooperation for shared prosperity is the original purpose and priority of BRICS cooperation. It is also in the economic field that we enjoy the most promising, diverse and fruitful cooperation. We need to step up trade, investment, economic, financial, and connectivity cooperation to make this pie still bigger. At the same time, we must work together at the United Nations, the Group of 20, and the World Trade Organization to safeguard the rule-based multilateral trading regime, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and reject protectionism outright.
我们要坚持创新引领，通过建设新工业革命伙伴关系，加强宏观经济政策协调，实现发展战略深度对接，在相互砥砺中加速新旧动能转换和经济结构转型升级。下阶段，中方将实施10期人力资源开发合作项目，邀请五国专家共同规划新工业革命合作蓝图，提升金砖国家及广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家竞争力。
It is important that we continue to pursue innovation-driven development and build a Partnership on New Industrial Revolution to strengthen coordination on macroeconomic policies, find more complementarities in our development strategies, and reinforce each other's efforts in renewing economic driving forces and upgrading economic structure. In this context, China will host ten human resources development programs during which experts of our five countries will be invited to draw up a blueprint for our cooperation in the new industrial revolution. By so doing, we hope to enhance the competitiveness of not only BRICS countries but also other emerging markets and developing countries.
第二，坚定维护国际和平安全。政治安全合作是金砖战略伙伴关系的重要内容。我们要继续高举多边主义旗帜，维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，敦促各方遵守国际法和国际关系基本准则，以对话解争端，以协商化分歧。要充分发挥外长会晤、安全事务高级代表会议、常驻联合国代表会晤等机制作用，发出金砖声音，提出金砖方案，共同构建相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系。
Second, we must safeguard global peace and security. Political and security cooperation is an important component of BRICS strategic partnership. We should stay committed to multilateralism and to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. We should call on all parties to abide by international law and basic norms governing international relations and to settle disputes through dialogue and differences through consultation. By fully leveraging the role of BRICS meetings of foreign ministers, national security advisers and permanent representatives to the United Nations, we can make our voice heard, put forth our solutions, and jointly work for a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, equality, justice and win-win cooperation.
第三，深入拓展人文交流合作。金砖五国孕育出各自灿烂文明，彼此交相辉映，人文交流合作大有可为。去年和今年，金砖人文交流明显提速。我们要继续以民心相通为宗旨，广泛开展文化、教育、卫生、体育、旅游等各领域人文大交流，筑牢金砖合作民意基础。中方建议举行金砖博物馆、美术馆、图书馆联盟联合巡展等活动，加强文化创意产业、旅游、地方城市等领域合作，讲述更多精彩动人的金砖故事，不断增进五国人民相互了解和传统友谊。
Third, we must expand people-to-people exchanges. We the BRICS countries boast great civilizations. When it comes to cultural and people-to-people exchanges, there is a lot we can do together. As a matter of fact, such exchanges have notably gained momentum over the last year or two. We should aim at greater people-to-people connectivity and more popular support for BRICS cooperation through extensive exchanges in cultural, educational, health, sports, tourism and other areas. China would therefore like to suggest joint touring exhibitions by the BRICS alliances of museums, art museums, national galleries, and libraries and closer cooperation in the cultural, creative and tourism industries and at the sub-national level. This way, we can spread the BRICS story far and wide to further enhance the mutual understanding and traditional friendship among our people.
第四，构建紧密伙伴关系网络。金砖机制成立伊始，我们就共同确定了走开放包容之路的正确方向。厦门会晤更确立了“金砖+”合作理念，其要义是在不断强化五国团结协作内核，提升金砖向心力、凝聚力的同时，持续扩大金砖“朋友圈”，同广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家实现共同发展繁荣。我们要在联合国、二十国集团等框架内拓展“金砖+”合作，扩大新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益和发展空间，推动构建广泛伙伴关系，为世界和平与发展作出更大贡献。
Fourth, we must build a network of closer partnerships. Since the inception of the BRICS mechanism, openness and inclusiveness have remained our abiding commitment. The "BRICS Plus" approach we adopted at the Xiamen Summit is designed to strengthen the unity and coordination among BRICS members for greater cohesion and, at the same time, to keep broadening the BRICS "circle of friends" in a joint pursuit of shared development and prosperity for all emerging markets and developing countries. We may explore "BRICS Plus" cooperation within the United Nations, the G20, and other frameworks to advance the common interests and boost the development space for emerging markets and developing countries, thus contributing more to world peace and development through broader partnerships.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
金砖的未来掌握在五国人民自己手中。让我们同国际社会一道，共同建设一个持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。
The future of BRICS is in the hands of our people. Let us work together with the rest of the international community for an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
26. 习近平主席在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议上的讲话
凝心聚力　务实笃行
共创上海合作组织美好明天
Staying Focused and Taking Solid Actions
For a Brighter Future of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议上的讲话（2019年6月14日，比什凯克）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 19th Meeting of the Council of Heads of State of
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)Bishkek, 14 June 2019 
尊敬的热恩别科夫总统，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency President Sooronbay Jeenbekov,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到美丽的比什凯克出席上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议。感谢东道国吉尔吉斯斯坦为本次会议所作的精心准备和周到安排。吉方去年6月接任轮值主席国以来，为推动组织发展做了大量工作，中方高度评价。
It gives me great pleasure to attend the 19th meeting of the SCO Council of Heads of State in the beautiful city of Bishkek. Let me begin by thanking our host Kyrgyzstan for the great preparation and thoughtful arrangements for this event. China highly commends the tremendous efforts Kyrgyzstan has made to promote the development of the SCO since taking over the SCO presidency last June.
青岛峰会以来，上海合作组织保持良好发展势头。中方在峰会上提出的发展观、安全观、合作观、文明观、全球治理观，丰富了本组织合作理念，得到各方积极响应。成员国以“上海精神”为指引，认真落实领导人共识，促进各领域合作不断走深走实，推动上海合作组织在新起点上实现新发展。
The SCO has maintained a sound momentum of development since the Qingdao Summit. The propositions on development, security, cooperation, civilization and global governance put forth by China at the Qingdao Summit were warmly received by all sides and added to the SCO's vision on cooperation. Guided by the Shanghai Spirit and the consensus of the leaders, SCO members have deepened cooperation in various fields and scored new achievements in moving the organization forward from a new starting point.
当前，国际形势风云激荡，但和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流不可逆转。“欲粟者务时，欲治者因势。”我们要牢牢把握世界多极化、经济全球化大势，从“上海精神”中发掘智慧，从团结合作中获取力量，携手构建更加紧密的上海合作组织命运共同体。
Despite immense changes in the international situation, peace, development and win-win cooperation remain the irreversible trend of our times. As a line in the Chinese classics goes, "Those who farm observe the shift of seasons, those who govern follow the change of the world." We need to keep a profound understanding of the overriding trend toward multi-polarity and economic globalization, draw inspiration from the wisdom of the Shanghai Spirit, and seek strength from solidarity and cooperation so as to jointly build a closer SCO community with a shared future.
第一，我们要把上海合作组织打造成团结互信的典范。上海合作组织保持强劲发展势头，成为促进地区安全稳定和发展繁荣的重要建设性力量，根本原因在于始终遵循“上海精神”、不断加强团结互信。我们要肩负起上海合作组织各国人民的重托，心往一处想，劲往一处使，不断汇聚实现共同目标的强大力量。
First, we must make the SCO an example of solidarity and mutual trust. The SCO has maintained a strong momentum of development and become an important and constructive force for regional security, stability and prosperity. The ultimate reason for its success lies in the Shanghai Spirit, which calls for continued enhancement of solidarity and mutual trust. We have on our shoulders the expectations of the people of SCO countries and we must think and work in one mind to build the momentum we need to achieve our common goal.
要坚持将“上海精神”作为本组织核心价值和共同理念，并根据形势变化和组织发展不断赋予其新的时代内涵。要恪守上海合作组织宪章、长期睦邻友好合作条约确立的宗旨和原则，增进政治互信，加大相互支持，扩大利益汇合点，为深化双边和多边合作创造更加有利的条件。
The Shanghai Spirit embodies the core values and common vision of the SCO. It has to be upheld and kept up-to-date in light of the evolving circumstances and the development of the organization. We must abide by the purposes and principles established by the SCO Charter and the Treaty on Long-term Good Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation, strengthen political mutual trust, give each other greater support, expand convergence of interests and create more favorable conditions to deepen bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
第二，我们要把上海合作组织打造成安危共担的典范。多年来，上海合作组织成员国着眼共同安全命运，开展务实高效安全合作，确保了本地区安全稳定大局。当前，面对恐怖主义、极端主义等严峻威胁，各方需要采取有力措施联手应对。
Second, we must make the SCO an example of common security. Over the years, guided by the vision of common security and a shared future, SCO members have carried out practical and highly efficient cooperation on the security front and ensured the overall security and stability of the region. Facing grave challenges from terrorism, extremism and other threats, we must all act together and with forceful measures to tackle our common challenges.
要秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，不断完善安全合作的法律基础，加强信息共享、联合行动、网络执法，着力提升本组织应对复杂局面的能力。要多措并举打击“三股势力”，扎牢安全篱笆，防范恐怖极端势力回流。要以《上海合作组织反极端主义公约》生效为契机，加强去极端化合作，有效遏制极端思想蔓延势头。阿富汗和上海合作组织成员国比邻而居，同时也是本组织重要观察员国。我们一直高度关注阿富汗局势，对阿富汗人民蒙受的战乱苦难感同身受。上海合作组织坚定支持“阿人主导，阿人所有”的阿富汗和平和解进程，将进一步发挥“上海合作组织-阿富汗联络组”作用，提升各领域合作水平，为阿富汗早日实现和平、和解、稳定、发展发挥建设性作用。中方愿继续为阿富汗和平重建提供力所能及的帮助。
We must pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We must further improve the legal foundation for security cooperation. We must step up information sharing, joint operations and cyber law enforcement to strengthen the SCO's ability to respond to complex situations. We must take a multi-pronged approach against terrorism, separatism and extremism, and fend off the resurgence of extremist and terrorist forces. As the SCO Convention on Countering Extremism enters into effect, we must further strengthen cooperation on deradicalization to curb the spread of extremist ideology. Afghanistan is neighbor to many SCO member countries and an important observer state of the organization. We have been following the developments in Afghanistan closely. Our thoughts are with the Afghan people who are suffering from war and chaos. The SCO firmly supports the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process. We will make full use of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, step up cooperation in various fields and play a constructive role in the early realization of peace, reconciliation, stability and development in Afghanistan. China will continue to do what it can to help with Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction.
第三，我们要把上海合作组织打造成互利共赢的典范。上海合作组织地区整体发展势头良好，在全球经济中所占比重稳步增加，对世界经济增长的贡献率不断提升。本地区拥有资源禀赋丰富、市场规模巨大、科技创新实力雄厚等无可比拟的优越条件，发展动力十足，合作前景广阔。我们要顺势而为，推动地区融合发展不断取得新成果。
Third, we must make the SCO an example of mutually beneficial cooperation. SCO countries enjoy a sound momentum of development on the whole, as evidenced by the steady increase of the region's share in the world economy and its contribution to global growth. Our region's incomparable advantages like rich natural endowment, a huge market, and strong scientific and technological innovation capability provide us with abundant driving force for development and bright prospects for cooperation. We need to seize the momentum and strive for new progress in the integrated development of the region.
要倡导维护多边贸易体制、构建开放型世界经济，推动在贸易和投资自由化便利化方面作出更多制度性安排，用好中国国际进口博览会等合作共享平台，促进区域经济进一步开放、交流、融合。要认真落实第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成果，充分利用本地区国家独特优势，推动共建“一带一路”倡议同各国发展战略及欧亚经济联盟等区域合作倡议深入对接。要发挥上海合作组织成员国政府间国际道路运输便利化协定联委会等机制作用，提升铁路、公路、油气管道等联通水平，着力构建全方位互联互通格局。
We must uphold the multilateral trading system, build an open world economy, work toward more institutional arrangements on trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and make full use of such cooperation and sharing platforms as the China International Import Expo to pursue greater economic openness, exchange and integration in our region. It is important that we earnestly deliver on the outcomes of the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation (BRF) and give full play to the unique strengths of countries in the region to better synergize the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) with the development strategies of countries in the region as well as regional cooperation initiatives such as the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU). We need to leverage the Joint Commission on Facilitation of International Road Transport and other relevant mechanisms to make railways, highways, and oil and gas pipelines more interconnected, so as to achieve all-round connectivity.
要坚持创新驱动发展，在数字经济、电子商务、人工智能、大数据等领域培育合作增长点。中方愿在陕西省设立上海合作组织农业技术交流培训示范基地，加强同地区国家现代农业领域合作。
We need to pursue innovation-driven development and foster new areas of cooperation such as digital economy, e-commerce, artificial intelligence and big data. China will be happy to set up an SCO demonstration base in Shaanxi Province for exchange and training on agricultural technologies to strengthen cooperation on modern agriculture with other countries in the region.
第四，我们要把上海合作组织打造成包容互鉴的典范。上海合作组织地区孕育了众多古老文明，不同民族、不同文化、不同宗教在此交融汇聚，相得益彰。我们要珍惜本地区文明多样性这一宝贵财富，摒弃文明冲突，坚持开放包容、互学互鉴，为各国人民世代友好、共同发展进步注入持久动力。
Fourth, we must make the SCO an example of inclusiveness and mutual learning. Our region is home to many ancient civilizations where different nations, cultures and religions have coexisted and drawn strength from each other. We need to celebrate the diversity of civilizations as a precious asset of our region, and say no to the idea of clash of civilizations. We need to uphold openness, inclusiveness and mutual learning, with a view to creating durable impetus for the lasting friendship between our peoples and the common development of our countries.
要不断深化文化、教育、旅游、体育、媒体等领域合作，密切妇女、青年等群体交流，不断提升民众参与度和获得感。上海合作组织医疗机构和企业上个月在中国广西防城港市成功举办国际医学创新合作论坛，各方达成许多合作共识。我们支持在防城港市建立国际医学开放试验区，继续推动上海合作组织医学创新合作。中方愿意适时举办上海合作组织传统医学论坛，发挥传统医学优势，改善民众健康，提高医疗卫生水平。去年以来，俄罗斯车里雅宾斯克市、中国重庆市分别成功举办上海合作组织地方领导人会晤。我们要落实好本次峰会将批准的地方合作文件，广泛调动地方和社会力量，将地方合作打造成人文合作新亮点。
We need to deepen our cooperation in culture, education, tourism, sports and media, and strengthen exchanges between women, the youth and other communities to ensure greater involvement of and greater benefit for our people. Last month, an International Medical Innovation and Cooperation Forum was successfully held in Fangchenggang in Guangxi Province of China, where participants from medical institutions and businesses of SCO countries reached extensive common ground on cooperation. We also support the initiative to set up an International Medical Opening-up Pilot Zone (China) in Fangchenggang to further promote medical innovation and cooperation within the SCO. China will be happy to host an SCO forum on traditional medicine in due time to help improve public health and medical services through traditional medicine. Since last year, Chelyabinsk of Russia and Chongqing of China have successfully held the first and second SCO Heads of Region Meetings. We need to earnestly implement the documents on sub-national cooperation to be approved by this summit and mobilize local governments and private actors to make sub-national cooperation a new highlight in our people-to-people cooperation.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
面对日益增多的全球性挑战，我们要展现应有的国际担当，坚持共商共建共享的全球治理观，密切协调和配合，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，促进多边主义和自由贸易，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。上海合作组织要完善伙伴关系布局，鼓励观察员国、对话伙伴更广泛参加各领域合作，加强同联合国等国际和地区组织交流，在国际和地区事务中发挥更加积极作用，共同致力于促进世界持久和平和共同繁荣。
In the face of increasing global challenges, it is imperative that we live up to our international responsibilities, stay committed to the vision of global governance based on extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, and step up coordination and collaboration. It is imperative that we uphold the international system with the United Nations at its core, promote multilateralism and free trade and make the international order more just and equitable. The SCO needs to improve its network of partnerships, encourage broader participation in cooperation by observer states and dialogue partners, strengthen exchanges with the UN and other international and regional organizations, play a more active role in international and regional affairs, and jointly contribute to durable peace and common prosperity of the world.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
中方祝贺吉方成功举办这次峰会并圆满完成主席国工作，祝贺普京总统接任本组织元首理事会主席，愿同各成员国一道，全力支持俄方主席国工作。
China extends congratulations to Kyrgyzstan for successfully hosting this summit upon wrapping up its SCO presidency, and to President Vladimir Putin for taking over the chairmanship of the SCO Council of Heads of State. China will work with all other SCO members to provide Russia with full support in its work.
吉尔吉斯斯坦有句谚语，“生存的力量在于团结。”让我们秉持“上海精神”，凝心聚力，务实笃行，共同创造上海合作组织更加美好的明天！
As a Kyrgyz saying goes, "From solidarity comes our strength for survival." Let us act in the Shanghai Spirit, stay focused and take solid actions for an even brighter future of the SCO.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
31. 习近平在2019年北京世界园艺博览会开幕式上的讲话
共谋绿色生活，共建美丽家园
Working Together for a Green and Better Future for All
——在2019年中国北京世界园艺博览会开幕式上的讲话
（2019年4月28日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 Beijing China
Beijing, 28 April 2019 
尊敬的各位国家元首，政府首脑和夫人，
尊敬的国际展览局秘书长和国际园艺生产者协会主席，
尊敬的各国使节，各位国际组织代表，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government and Your Spouses,
Your Excellency Secretary General of the Bureau International des Expositions,
Your Excellency President of the International Association of Horticultural Producers,
Your Excellencies Diplomatic Envoys and Representatives of International Organizations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
“迟日江山丽，春风花草香。”四月的北京，春回大地，万物复苏。很高兴同各位嘉宾相聚在雄伟的长城脚下、美丽的妫水河畔，共同拉开2019年中国北京世界园艺博览会大幕。
"Spring scenery greets the eye; sweet blooms perfume the air." Such is the delight of April in Beijing, full of exuberance and vitality, as depicted by an ancient Chinese poem. By the beautiful Guishui River and at the foot of the majestic Great Wall, we are very glad to welcome all the distinguished guests to the opening of the International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 Beijing China.
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对远道而来的各位嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！对支持和参与北京世界园艺博览会的各国朋友，表示衷心的感谢！
On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I wish to extend a warm welcome to all the guests coming to the Expo and sincere appreciation to all the friends for their support and participation.
北京世界园艺博览会以“绿色生活，美丽家园”为主题，旨在倡导人们尊重自然、融入自然、追求美好生活。北京世界园艺博览会园区，同大自然的湖光山色交相辉映。我希望，这片园区所阐释的绿色发展理念能传导至世界各个角落。
The Expo, as indicated by its theme "Live Green, Live Better", aims to promote respect for nature and a better life in harmony with nature. It is our hope that this Expo Park, designed to blend into its splendid surrounding landscape, will show the world the vision of green development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
锦绣中华大地，是中华民族赖以生存和发展的家园，孕育了中华民族5000多年的灿烂文明，造就了中华民族天人合一的崇高追求。
This beautiful land of China, home to the Chinese nation and its splendid 5,000-year civilization, has nurtured the lofty idea of harmony between man and nature.
现在，生态文明建设已经纳入中国国家发展总体布局，建设美丽中国已经成为中国人民心向往之的奋斗目标。中国生态文明建设进入了快车道，天更蓝、山更绿、水更清将不断展现在世人面前。
Ecological conservation has become part of China's overall plan for national development. Building a beautiful China is an inspiring goal for the Chinese people. As China steps up its conservation efforts, the world will see a China with more blue skies, lush mountains and lucid waters.
纵观人类文明发展史，生态兴则文明兴，生态衰则文明衰。工业化进程创造了前所未有的物质财富，也产生了难以弥补的生态创伤。杀鸡取卵、竭泽而渔的发展方式走到了尽头，顺应自然、保护生态的绿色发展昭示着未来。
The history of civilizations shows that the rise or fall of a civilization is closely tied to its relationship with nature. Industrialization, while generating unprecedented material wealth, has incurred serious damage to Mother Nature. Development without thought to the future is not sustainable. The way forward should be green development that focuses on harmony with nature and eco-friendly progress.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
仰望夜空，繁星闪烁。地球是全人类赖以生存的唯一家园。我们要像保护自己的眼睛一样保护生态环境，像对待生命一样对待生态环境，同筑生态文明之基，同走绿色发展之路！
Looking up at night, we are awed by the many stars in the sky. Yet, planet Earth is the only home for mankind. We must protect this planet like our own eyes, and cherish nature the way we cherish life. We must preserve what gives our planet life and embrace green development.
——我们应该追求人与自然和谐。山峦层林尽染，平原蓝绿交融，城乡鸟语花香。这样的自然美景，既带给人们美的享受，也是人类走向未来的依托。无序开发、粗暴掠夺，人类定会遭到大自然的无情报复；合理利用、友好保护，人类必将获得大自然的慷慨回报。我们要维持地球生态整体平衡，让子孙后代既能享有丰富的物质财富，又能遥望星空、看见青山、闻到花香。
- We need to advocate harmony between man and nature. Lush mountains, green fields, singing birds and blossoming flowers offer more than beauty to the eye. They are the basis for future development. Nature will punish those who exploit and plunder it brutally, and reward those who use and protect it carefully. We must maintain the overall balance of the Earth's eco-system, so that our children and children's children will not only have material wealth but also enjoy starry skies, green mountains and sweet flowers.
——我们应该追求绿色发展繁荣。绿色是大自然的底色。我一直讲，绿水青山就是金山银山，改善生态环境就是发展生产力。良好生态本身蕴含着无穷的经济价值，能够源源不断创造综合效益，实现经济社会可持续发展。
- We need to pursue prosperity through green development. Green is the color of nature. I have always said that green mountains and lucid waters are indeed mountains of gold and silver, and that environmental improvement means greater productivity. A sound environment promises great economic potential, generates good returns, and contributes to economic and social sustainability.
——我们应该追求热爱自然情怀。“取之有度，用之有节”，是生态文明的真谛。我们要倡导简约适度、绿色低碳的生活方式，拒绝奢华和浪费，形成文明健康的生活风尚。要倡导环保意识、生态意识，构建全社会共同参与的环境治理体系，让生态环保思想成为社会生活中的主流文化。要倡导尊重自然、爱护自然的绿色价值观念，让天蓝地绿水清深入人心，形成深刻的人文情怀。
- We need to follow a philosophy that cares for nature. Well-measured use of natural resources is the key to ecological conservation. We need to promote a simpler, greener and low-carbon lifestyle, oppose excessiveness and foster a culture of living green and living healthy. We need to raise people's awareness, develop a conservation system in which everyone plays a part, and mainstream ecological conservation into every aspect of social life. We need to advocate the value of green development that reveres and cares for nature so that blue skies, green fields and clear waters will be a vision cherished by all.
——我们应该追求科学治理精神。生态治理必须遵循规律，科学规划，因地制宜，统筹兼顾，打造多元共生的生态系统。只有赋之以人类智慧，地球家园才会充满生机活力。生态治理，道阻且长，行则将至。我们既要有只争朝夕的精神，更要有持之以恒的坚守。
- We need to adopt a scientific approach to ecological conservation. To create an eco-system where all elements coexist in harmony, we need to follow the laws of nature, base our efforts on scientific planning, adopt a holistic approach to conservation, and factor in local conditions. Human wisdom is essential to sustaining the dynamism of Earth, our common homeland. Ecological conservation may be a long and arduous effort. We must press ahead with a sense of urgency and perseverance to achieve our goals.
——我们应该追求携手合作应对。建设美丽家园是人类的共同梦想。面对生态环境挑战，人类是一荣俱荣、一损俱损的命运共同体，没有哪个国家能独善其身。唯有携手合作，我们才能有效应对气候变化、海洋污染、生物保护等全球性环境问题，实现联合国2030年可持续发展目标。只有并肩同行，才能让绿色发展理念深入人心、全球生态文明之路行稳致远。
- We need to join hands to meet common challenges. A beautiful homeland is the shared aspiration of mankind. In the face of environmental challenges, all countries are in a community with destinies linked, and no country can stay immune. Only together can we effectively address climate change, marine pollution, biological conservation and other global environmental issues and achieve the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Only concerted efforts can drive home the idea of green development and bring about steady progress in the ecological conservation of the globe.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
昨天，第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成功闭幕，在座许多嘉宾出席了论坛。共建“一带一路”就是要建设一条开放发展之路，同时也必须是一条绿色发展之路。这是与会各方达成的重要共识。中国愿同各国一道，共同建设美丽地球家园，共同构建人类命运共同体。
Many of you attended the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, which drew to a successful conclusion yesterday. It was agreed at the Forum that we will pursue open and green development in Belt and Road cooperation. China is ready to work with all other countries to build a better homeland and a community with a shared future for mankind.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
一代人有一代人的使命。建设生态文明，功在当代，利在千秋。让我们从自己、从现在做起，把接力棒一棒一棒传下去。
Every generation has its own mission. Our efforts to conserve the eco-system will benefit not only this generation, but many more to come. Let us act now, start with ourselves, and make sure that the baton of conservation will be passed on.
我宣布，2019年中国北京世界园艺博览会开幕！
I now declare open the International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 Beijing China!
24. 习近平在二十国集团领导人峰会上关于世界经济形势和贸易问题的讲话
携手共进，合力打造高质量世界经济
Working Together to Build a High-Quality World Economy——在二十国集团领导人峰会上关于世界经济形势和贸易问题的发言（2019年6月28日，大阪）中华人民共和国主席习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
On Global Economy and Trade at the G20 SummitOsaka, 28 June 2019 
各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴同大家在大阪相聚。
It is my great pleasure to join you here in Osaka.
国际金融危机发生10年后，世界经济再次来到十字路口。保护主义、单边主义持续蔓延，贸易和投资争端加剧，全球产业格局和金融稳定受到冲击，世界经济运行风险和不确定性显著上升，国际投资者信心明显不足。
Ten years after the 2008 international financial crisis, the global economy has again reached a crossroads. Protectionism and unilateralism are spreading, and trade and investment tensions are on the rise, bringing disruptions to the global industry landscape and financial stability. The world economy is confronting more risks and uncertainties, dampening the confidence of international investors.
二十国集团是国际经济合作主要论坛。作为世界主要经济体领导人，我们有责任在关键时刻为世界经济和全球治理把准航向，为市场增强信心，给人民带来希望。
The G20 is the premier forum for international economic cooperation. We, as the leaders of major economies, are duty bound to re-calibrate the direction of the world economy and global governance at this critical juncture, work together to boost market confidence, and bring hope to our people.
——我们要尊重客观规律。经济运行有其自身规律。只有充分尊重经济规律，发挥市场作用，扫除人为障碍，才能适应生产力发展要求，实现贸易畅通、百业兴旺。
- We must respect the objective laws of the economy. Economic operation has its underlying laws. Fully respecting these laws, leveraging the role of the market and removing man-made obstacles represent a sure way to raise productivity, boost trade and revitalize all industries.
——我们要把握发展大势。古往今来，人类从闭塞走向开放、从隔绝走向融合是不可阻挡的时代潮流。我们要以更大的开放拥抱发展机遇，以更好的合作谋求互利共赢，引导经济全球化朝正确方向发展。
- We must tap into the prevailing trend of development. The history of human society is marked by a transition from isolation and exclusion to openness and integration. This is an unstoppable trend. We must open up further to embrace opportunities of development and seek win-win outcomes through closer cooperation. We must work together to shape and steer economic globalization in the right direction.
——我们要胸怀共同未来。放眼世界，各国早已休戚相关、命运相连。我们要立足共同利益，着眼长远发展，致力于实现世界持久和平繁荣、各国人民安居乐业，避免因一时短视犯下不可挽回的历史性错误。
- We must keep in mind our shared future. In today's world, all countries' interests are closely intertwined. We have a high stake in each other's future. By expanding common interests and taking a long-term view, we can realize enduring peace and prosperity in the world and deliver a better life to all our people. We must not allow ourselves to become prisoners of short-term interests and make irrevocable mistakes of historic consequences.
我愿提出以下几点建议。
Based on these principles, I would like to share with you a few suggestions:
第一，坚持改革创新，挖掘增长动力。世界经济已经进入新旧动能转换期。我们要找准切入点，大力推进结构性改革，通过发展数字经济、促进互联互通、完善社会保障措施等，建设适应未来发展趋势的产业结构、政策框架、管理体系，提升经济运行效率和韧性，努力实现高质量发展。我们要抓住新技术、新产业、新业态不断涌现的历史机遇，营造有利市场环境，尊重、保护、鼓励创新。我们要提倡国际创新合作，超越疆域局限和人为藩篱，集全球之智，克共性难题，让创新成果得以广泛应用，惠及更多国家和人民。
First, we need to persist in reform and innovation to find more impetus for growth. The world economy is in a transition from old to new drivers of growth. We must find the best way to advance structural reform. We must develop a future-oriented industry structure, policy framework and management system through promoting the digital economy, enhancing connectivity and improving social security, so as to enhance the efficiency and resilience of our economies and strive for high-quality development. We must capitalize on the historic opportunities brought by new technologies, industries and forms of business to foster an enabling market environment where innovation is respected, protected and encouraged. We must champion international collaboration on innovation and rise above geographic and man-made fences. When we put our heads together to resolve the common challenges and spread the fruits of innovation, we can make a difference for more countries and for the life of their peoples.
第二，坚持与时俱进，完善全球治理。当前，经济全球化遇到一些曲折，向我们提出了如何完善全球治理的时代命题。二十国集团应该继续发挥引领作用，确保世界经济开放、包容、平衡、普惠发展。我们要加强多边贸易体制，对世界贸易组织进行必要改革。改革的目的是与时俱进，使得世界贸易组织能够更加有效地践行其开放市场、促进发展的宗旨。改革的结果应当有利于维护自由贸易和多边主义，收窄发展鸿沟。同时，面对未来全球系统性金融风险挑战，我们不但要确保金融安全网资源充足，也要让国际金融架构的代表性更加合理，更好反映世界经济现实格局。这不仅事关公平，也直接影响到应对挑战和危机的针对性和有效性。我们还要落实应对气候变化《巴黎协定》，完善能源治理、环境治理、数字治理。
Second, we need to progress with the times and improve global governance. With economic globalization facing headwinds, we must reflect on the important question of how best to improve global governance. The G20 should continue to take the lead in making the world economy open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial for all. We must strengthen the multilateral trading system and pursue WTO reform as necessary. The goal of the reform is to bring the WTO up to date and make it better able to deliver its mandate of enhancing market openness and boosting development, and the results should be conducive to upholding free trade and multilateralism and to narrowing the development gap. At the same time, the G20 must also anticipate future systemic financial risks and challenges at the global level. We must ensure sufficient resources for the financial safety net and see to it that the representativeness of the international financial architecture makes more sense and better reflects the realities of the world economy. This not only is a matter of fairness, but also affects our ability to take targeted and effective measures to meet challenges and navigate crises when they come our way. It is also very important for the G20 to implement the Paris Agreement and improve energy, environmental and digital governance.
第三，坚持迎难而上，破解发展瓶颈。当今世界面临的各种难题，追根溯源都与发展鸿沟、发展赤字有关。全球范围看，发展领域仍面临巨大融资缺口，落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程任重道远。中国提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的就是动员更多资源，拉紧互联互通纽带，释放增长动力，实现市场对接，让更多国家和地区融入经济全球化，共同走出一条互利共赢的康庄大道。第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛的成功表明，这一倡议是合民心、顺潮流的好事，得到国际社会普遍欢迎和支持。二十国集团应该继续将发展置于宏观经济政策协调的优先位置，增加发展投入，用实实在在的行动引领发展合作。这既是对广大发展中国家期待的回应，也将为世界经济增长增添持久动力。
Third, we need to rise up to challenges and break bottlenecks in development. The myriad challenges facing the world today are all related in one way or another to the development gap and deficit. The gaping shortfall in global development financing means that the realization of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development remains a daunting task for us. It is against such a backdrop that China proposed the Belt and Road Initiative. The Initiative is designed to mobilize more resources, strengthen connectivity links, leverage potential growth drivers, and connect the markets with a view to integrating more countries and regions into economic globalization and achieving shared prosperity through mutually beneficial cooperation. The success of the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation demonstrates the broad welcome and support for this Initiative from the global community, as it effectively responds to the aspirations of our people and the trend of our times. It is important that the G20 continue to prioritize development in macroeconomic policy coordination, scale up input in development, and lead development cooperation through concrete actions. By doing so, we can live up to the expectations of developing countries and secure a lasting driving force for global growth.
第四，坚持伙伴精神，妥善处理分歧。二十国集团成员汇聚了主要发达经济体和新兴市场经济体，经济总量占世界近90%。我们处在不同发展阶段，在一些问题上存在利益差异和观点分歧很正常。关键是要弘扬伙伴精神，本着相互尊重、相互信任态度，平等协商、求同存异、管控分歧、扩大共识。大国之间如果能做到这一点，不仅符合自身利益，也有利于世界和平与发展。
Fourth, we need to uphold our partnership and resolve differences properly. The G20 is a grouping of major advanced economies and emerging markets, accounting for nearly 90% of the global economy. Given the different development stages of G20 members, it is only natural that we may have diverging interests and views on some issues. The important thing is to always promote our partnership and treat each other with respect and trust, and in that spirit, engage in consultation as equals, manage differences while seeking common ground, and build greater consensus. If this can be achieved between major countries, it will serve not only our own interests but also peace and development in the world.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
当前，中国经济稳中向好，国内生产总值增速连续多年保持在6%以上的合理区间。我们将在近期采取措施的基础上，进一步推出若干重大举措，加快形成对外开放新局面，努力实现高质量发展。
The Chinese economy has continued its stable and sound performance, with its GDP growing within a proper range of more than 6% for years running. On top of the steps we have taken recently, China will further unveil major measures aimed at breaking new ground in opening-up and delivering high-quality development.
第一，进一步开放市场。我们即将发布2019年版外资准入负面清单，进一步扩大农业、采矿业、制造业、服务业开放。新设6个自由贸易试验区，增设上海自由贸易试验区新片区，加快探索建设海南自由贸易港进程。
First, more will be done to open up the Chinese market wider. We will release the 2019 edition of the negative list on foreign investment. The focus will be on greater openness in the agriculture, mining, manufacturing and services sectors. We will set up six new pilot free trade zones and open a new section of the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone, and will speed up exploration of building a free trade port in Hainan province.
第二，主动扩大进口。我们将进一步自主降低关税水平，努力消除非关税贸易壁垒，大幅削减进口环节制度性成本。办好第二届中国国际进口博览会。
Second, greater initiative will be demonstrated in expanding imports. We will further bring down China's overall tariff level, strive to remove non-tariff trade barriers, and slash institutional costs of imports. We will ensure the success of the Second China International Import Expo.
第三，持续改善营商环境。我们将于明年1月1日实施新的外商投资法律制度，引入侵权惩罚性赔偿制度，增强民事司法保护和刑事保护力度，提高知识产权保护水平。
Third, more steps will be taken to improve the business environment. In the new legal framework for foreign investment that is to take effect on 1 January next year, we will introduce a punitive compensation mechanism for intellectual property infringement cases and make the relevant civil and criminal laws more stringent to deliver better IP protection.
第四，全面实施平等待遇。我们将全面取消外资准入负面清单之外的限制。准入后阶段，对在中国境内注册的各类企业平等对待、一视同仁，建立健全外资企业投诉机制。
Fourth, equal treatment will be extended to all foreign investment. We will lift all foreign investment restrictions beyond the negative list, and provide equal treatment to all types of businesses registered in China in the post-establishment phase. A complaint mechanism will be set up for foreign companies to air their grievances.
第五，大力推动经贸谈判。我们将推动早日达成区域全面经济伙伴关系协定，加快中欧投资协定谈判，加快中日韩自由贸易协定谈判进程。
Fifth, greater efforts will be made to advance trade talks. We will push for an early conclusion of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and for faster progress in the negotiations on a China-EU investment agreement and a China-Japan-ROK free trade agreement.
中国有信心走好自己的路、办好自己的事，同世界各国和平共处、合作共赢，共建人类命运共同体，为创造世界经济更加美好的明天不懈努力。
Let me conclude by saying that China has full confidence in following its path and running its own affairs well. At the same time, China will work in the spirit of peaceful co-existence and win-win cooperation with all other countries to build a community with a shared future for mankind and to tirelessly pursue a brighter future of the global economy.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
25. 习近平在亚信第五次峰会上的讲话
携手开创亚洲安全和发展新局面
Working Together for New Progress of Security and Development in Asia
——在亚信第五次峰会上的讲话（2019年6月15日，杜尚别）
中华人民共和国主席习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Fifth Summit of the Conference 
on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia Dushanbe, 15 June 2019  尊敬的拉赫蒙总统，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency President Emomali Rahmon,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到杜尚别出席亚洲相互协作与信任措施会议第五次峰会，感谢主席国塔吉克斯坦为峰会顺利举行所作的精心准备和周到安排。
It is my great pleasure to attend the Fifth Summit of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) here in Dushanbe. I wish to thank the Tajikistan side for being such a thoughtful and hospitable host.
成立亚信是哈萨克斯坦首任总统纳扎尔巴耶夫提出的重要倡议。亚信成立27年来，顺应时代发展潮流，致力于增进各国互信和协作，维护地区安全和稳定，为促进亚洲和平与发展作出了积极贡献。
Establishing CICA was an important initiative proposed by Nursultan Nazarbayev, the first president of Kazakhstan. For the past 27 years, CICA, responding to the trend of the times, has been committed to strengthening trust and coordination among its member states and to promoting security and stability in our region, thus making a valuable contribution to peace and development in Asia.
在亚信上海峰会上，为促进地区和平与发展事业，我提出践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观，倡议探索符合亚洲特点和各国共同利益的安全和发展道路，得到各方积极响应。5年来，各方大力支持中方两任主席国和塔方现任主席国工作，不断加深理解、深化合作，共同推动亚信得到新的发展。
It is with promoting regional peace and development in mind that I proposed, at the 2014 Shanghai Summit, a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and called for exploring a security and development path that suits Asia and serves the common interests of all. My proposal found strong resonance. Over the past five years, the member states have rendered great support to China as a two-term Chair and to Tajikistan as the current Chair. We have strengthened understanding and cooperation among us, and worked together to secure new progress for CICA's development.
中方愿同各方一道，大力支持塔方主席国工作，深化各领域合作，推动亚信进程不断迈上新台阶。中方将举办成员国军事院校校长论坛，以及中小企业、金融、环保、扶贫、人文等领域活动，为亚信发展作出应有贡献。
China will work with other member states to support the Chair, deepen cooperation across the board and take the CICA process to a new level. China will host a forum for the heads of military educational institutions of CICA member states and organize events on small and medium enterprises, financial services, environmental protection, poverty alleviation and people-to-people exchanges so as to play its due role in promoting CICA's development.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
亚洲是当今世界最具发展活力和潜力的地区之一，同时面临政治互信不足、经济发展不平衡、安全和治理问题突出等共同挑战，实现持久和平和共同繁荣任重道远。
Asia is one of the most dynamic regions with great development potential. Asian countries also face some common challenges such as inadequate political trust, uneven economic development and prominent security and governance impediments. Our journey to lasting peace and common prosperity will be a long and arduous one.
“君子务本，本立而道生。”2015年，我提出构筑亚洲命运共同体倡议，阐述了建设亚洲美好明天的共同目标。几年来，亚洲国家在迈向命运共同体过程中，增强了合作意识，丰富了合作实践，积累了合作经验。新形势下，我们要坚持既定目标，共迎机遇、共对挑战，携手开创亚洲安全和发展新局面。
An ancient Chinese philosopher once observed, "The gentleman devotes his attention to the basic of things. When he has mastered the basics, he will find the Way." In 2015, I put forth the initiative of building an Asian community with a shared future and laid out what we can all agree to in building a better Asia. Since then, we Asian countries have better appreciated the value of cooperation, extended our practice of cooperation and gained more experience of cooperation, thus truly moving toward an Asian community with a shared future. Under the current circumstances, we need to stay true to our goal, embrace the opportunities and address the challenges together, and collectively work for new progress of security and development in Asia.
——建设互敬互信的亚洲是我们的共同期待。相互尊重和信任是国与国应有的相处之道。我们要遵循联合国宪章确立的宗旨和原则，尊重各国主权、独立、领土完整，尊重各国自主选择的政治制度和发展道路。要摒弃零和博弈、保护主义，加强政策沟通，增进政治互信，逐步扩大战略共识。
- Building an Asia where countries enjoy mutual respect and trust is our common aspiration. Mutual respect and trust is required in developing state-to-state relations. We need to observe the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of each country and the political system and development path chosen by them. A zero-sum mentality and protectionism must be rejected in favor of more policy communication and political trust, so that we can expand our strategic consensus.
——建设安全稳定的亚洲是我们的共同目标。谋求共同、综合、合作、可持续安全，就是为了实现地区国家整体安全。我们要坚持对话而不对抗、结伴而不结盟，妥善应对各种传统和非传统安全问题，特别是要坚决打击一切形式的恐怖主义。要注重采取各种有效的预防性措施，从根源上防范极端思潮的滋生。要探讨建立符合亚洲特点的地区安全架构，追求普遍安全和共同安全。
- Building a secure and stable Asia is our common objective. The vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security is about realizing the security of all countries in the region as a whole. Confrontation and alliances must be eschewed in favor of dialogue and partnership. We must find proper solutions to traditional and non-traditional security issues and, in particular, deal firmly with terrorism in all its forms. We must take effective preventive measures of various sorts to eradicate the breeding ground of extremist ideology, and explore a regional security architecture suited to Asia's realities, one that will enhance universal security for us all.
——建设发展繁荣的亚洲是我们的共同愿景。发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。我们要共同推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，早日达成《区域全面经济伙伴关系协定》等区域一体化文件。要落实今年4月第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛共识，加强发展战略对接，促进全方位互联互通，推动各国经济高质量发展。
- Building a growing and prosperous Asia is our common vision. Development is the master key to all problems. We need to jointly promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and conclude at an early date the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and other documents on regional integration. We need to work on the follow-ups to the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation held in April this year, seek greater complementarity between our development strategies, and enhance all-round connectivity to boost high-quality growth of all countries.
——建设开放包容的亚洲是我们的共同追求。封闭的空间只会四处碰壁，开放的道路才会越走越宽。我们要落实好今年5月亚洲文明对话大会共识，树立平等、互鉴、对话、包容的文明观。要扩大域内外国家间人文交往，以多样共存超越文明优越，以和谐共生超越文明冲突，以交融共享超越文明隔阂，以繁荣共进超越文明固化。
- Building an open and inclusive Asia is our common pursuit. Isolation would lead us nowhere, while openness would offer us infinite possibilities. We need to implement the consensus reached at last month's Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations, and promote equality, mutual learning, dialogue and mutual accommodation between civilizations. We need to encourage more people-to-people exchanges among countries both in and outside the region so that when it comes to civilizations, respect for diversity will replace a sense of superiority, harmonious co-existence will replace conflict, interaction and sharing will replace estrangement, and prosperity and progress for all will replace self-imposed isolation and ossification.
——建设合作创新的亚洲是我们的共同需要。变革创新是推动人类文明进步的强大动力。我们要顺应时代变化，把勇于革新的理念落实到行动层面，加强理论、制度、科技、文化等各方面创新，永葆亚洲发展活力。要敢于推陈出新，努力为解决老问题寻找新答案，为应对新问题寻找好答案，破解亚洲面临的各类难题。
- Building a cooperative and creative Asia is our common need. Reform and innovation is a powerful driving force behind the progress of human civilization. We must, in light of the changing times, translate our readiness for innovation into concrete actions, and break more new ground in theory, system, science and technology, and culture, among other areas, to keep the vibrancy of a growing Asia. We need to think outside the box to find new solutions to old problems and good solutions to new ones. This way, we will be better able to address the various challenges facing Asia.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
中国始终坚持同亚洲国家发展睦邻友好关系，参与创建亚信、上海合作组织、亚洲基础设施投资银行等多边安全和发展机制，支持东盟、南盟、阿盟等发挥积极作用，为亚洲稳定和繁荣作出重要贡献。作为亚洲大家庭一员和国际社会负责任大国，中国将继续做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者，推动构建新型国际关系和人类命运共同体。
China is committed to developing good-neighborly and friendly ties with other Asian countries. China has participated in the establishment of such multilateral security and development mechanisms as CICA, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and supported the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the League of Arab States and other organizations in playing their active roles, thus making an important contribution to stability and prosperity in Asia. As a member of the Asian family and a responsible major country in the global community, China will continue to build peace, contribute to development and uphold order in the world, and work for a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，我们将坚定走和平发展道路，决不损人利己、以邻为壑。中方将继续在和平共处五项原则基础上深化同各国的友好合作，通过和平方式处理同有关国家的领土主权和海洋权益争端，支持对话协商解决地区热点问题。
First, China will stay committed to peaceful development and reject a beggar-thy-neighbor approach. China will continue to deepen its friendship and cooperation with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence, pursue peaceful settlement to disputes with relevant countries over territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, and support negotiated solutions to regional hotspot issues.
第二，我们将坚持开放共赢，同各国分享发展机遇。中方愿同各方用好共建“一带一路”国际合作平台，为共同发展持续注入强大动能。中方今年将举办第二届中国国际进口博览会，努力为各方进入中国市场创造更多便利条件。
Second, China will stay committed to opening-up for win-win outcomes and share development opportunities with other countries. China will work with all other parties to make good use of the platform of Belt and Road cooperation to secure a sustained driver for our common development. Later this year, China will host the Second China International Import Expo to further facilitate access to the Chinese market.
第三，我们将坚定践行多边主义，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序。中方愿同各国一道，秉持共商共建共享的全球治理观，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，坚定维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制。对于经贸往来中出现的问题，各方都应该本着相互尊重的精神，通过平等对话协商，按照国际关系准则和多边贸易规则妥善处理，而不是动辄诉诸保护主义、单边主义。中国的这一立场，不仅是在维护各国的正当发展权利，也是在维护国际公平正义。
Third, China will stay committed to practicing multilateralism to safeguard the international order underpinned by international law. China will work with other countries to advocate extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits in global governance, and firmly uphold the UN-centered international system and the multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core. With regard to any problem that occurs on the economic and trade front, all sides need to act in the spirit of mutual respect and handle it appropriately through equal-footed dialogue and consultation in accordance with norms in international relations and multilateral trading rules, rather than resort to protectionism and unilateralism at every turn. By taking such a position, China is upholding the legitimate development rights and interests of all countries and, for that matter, fairness and justice in the world.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
塔吉克民族伟大诗人鲁达基曾写道，“智者追求善良与和平，愚者才醉心争吵和战争。”中方愿同各方携手努力，不懈追求和平、稳定、繁荣，共同创造亚洲和世界的美好未来。
As the great Tajik poet Rudaki wrote, "The wise pursue kindness and peace; only the fool are bent on strife and war." Let us join hands in a tireless pursuit of peace, stability and prosperity and usher in a brighter future for Asia and beyond.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
20. 习近平在金砖国家领导人巴西利亚会晤公开会议上的讲话
携手努力共谱合作新篇章
Together for a New Chapter in BRICS Cooperation
——在金砖国家领导人巴西利亚会晤公开会议上的讲话
（2019年11月14日，巴西利亚）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Brasilia Summit
Brasilia, 14 November 2019 
尊敬的博索纳罗总统，
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的拉马福萨总统：
Your Excellency President Jair Bolsonaro,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa,
很高兴同大家相聚在巴西利亚，首先我要感谢博索纳罗总统盛情邀请和热情周到安排。
It gives me great pleasure to join you in this meeting in Brasilia. Let me first thank President Bolsonaro for the kind invitation and gracious hospitality.
这是我10年来第三次到访巴西。再次踏上这片充满活力的热土，巴西广袤的土地、丰富的资源、热情的人民、巨大的潜力使我印象深刻。
This is my third visit to Brazil in ten years. Stepping once again on this land of vibrancy, I am deeply impressed by its vastness and natural endowment, by the friendly people, and by the great promise the country holds.
这次会晤是在世界经济发展和国际格局演变的关键时刻举行的。环顾全球，新科技革命和产业变革方兴未艾，为各国实现跨越式发展提供更多机遇。新兴市场国家和发展中国家的崛起势头不可逆转，为全球经济治理体系变革注入强劲动力。令人担忧的是，保护主义、单边主义愈演愈烈，治理赤字、发展赤字、信任赤字有增无减，世界经济中不稳定不确定因素明显上升。
We are meeting at a time when crucial developments are taking place in the world economy and international landscape. A burgeoning round of technological revolution and industrial transformation has created more opportunities for countries across the globe to achieve leapfrog development. Meanwhile, the unstoppable rise of emerging markets and developing countries has injected strong impetus to the reform of the global economic governance system. Nevertheless, there are also causes for concern: rising protectionism and unilateralism; greater deficit of governance, development and trust; and growing uncertainties and destabilizing factors in the world economy.
面对百年未有之大变局，作为重要的新兴市场国家和发展中国家，我们应该顺应时代潮流，回应人民呼声，展现应有的责任担当，在追求发展道路上矢志不移，在团结合作历程中携手奋进，为人民谋幸福，为世界谋发展。
Faced with profound changes rarely seen in a century, major emerging markets and developing countries like us must grasp the trend of the times. We must respond to the call of our people, and shoulder our responsibilities. We must remain true to our unwavering commitment to development and strengthen solidarity and cooperation for the well-being of our people and for the development of our world.
——营造和平稳定的安全环境。当今世界并不太平，地区安全局势持续紧张，热点问题层出不穷，传统和非传统安全威胁相互交织，全球性挑战更加突出。
-- Let us work to foster a security environment of peace and stability. Our world has yet to achieve full peace. As we speak, tensions continue in regional security situations; hotspot issues keep emerging; traditional and non-traditional security threats are interwoven. Challenges of a global nature are becoming more prominent.
我们应该以维护世界和平、促进共同发展为目标，以维护公平正义、推动互利共赢为宗旨，以国际法和公认的国际关系基本准则为基础，倡导并践行多边主义。要维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，反对霸权主义和强权政治，建设性参与地缘政治热点问题解决进程。要通过金砖国家外长会晤、安全事务高级代表会议以及反恐工作组、网络安全工作组、常驻多边机构代表定期磋商等机制，密切战略沟通和协作，发出金砖共同声音，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
We need to take it as our aim to safeguard peace and development for all; we need to uphold fairness and justice and promote win-win results; we need to base our efforts on international law and widely recognized norms of international relations; we need to champion and put into practice multilateralism. It is important that we uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the UN-centered international system, oppose hegemonism and power politics, and take a constructive part in settling geopolitical flash points. We can use BRICS mechanisms, including the meetings of our ministers of foreign affairs/international relations and high representatives for security issues, the working groups on counter-terrorism and cybersecurity, and the regular meetings among our permanent representatives to multilateral institutions, to maintain close strategic communication and coordination and speak in one voice for a more just and equitable international order.
——谋求开放创新的发展前景。发展才是硬道理。当今时代的许多问题，追根溯源都是发展不平衡不充分造成的。我们应该把握改革创新的时代机遇，深入推进金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系，在贸易和投资、数字经济、互联互通等领域不断打造合作成果，助力五国经济发展，努力实现高质量发展。
-- Let us pursue greater development prospects through openness and innovation. Development is what really matters to all. Many of the world's problems are rooted in unbalanced and inadequate development. We must therefore seize the opportunities that come with reform and innovation. We need to deepen the BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution, and strive for more productive cooperation in such fields as trade and investment, digital economy, and connectivity. These efforts will surely lend impetus to economic growth and high-quality development in our five countries.
当前，经济全球化遭遇挫折，一定程度反映出现行全球治理体系的缺陷。金砖国家应该发挥负责任大国作用，积极倡导共商共建共享的全球治理观，推动全球经济治理体系变革。要坚决反对保护主义，维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，提升新兴市场国家和发展中国家在国际事务中的发言权和影响力。要推动将发展问题置于全球宏观政策框架核心位置，坚定落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程和应对气候变化《巴黎协定》，实现经济、社会、环境各领域协同发展。
At present, economic globalization is encountering setbacks, which reveal, to a certain degree, the flaws existing in the global governance system. We the BRICS countries need to play our role as responsible major countries. We need to advocate extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits in global governance, and push for reform of the global economic governance system. We need to stand firm against protectionism, uphold the WTO-centered multilateral trading system, and increase the voice and influence of emerging markets and developing countries in international affairs. We need to prioritize development in the global macro policy framework, follow through the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on climate change, and promote coordinated progress in the economic, social and environmental spheres.
——促进互学互鉴的人文交流。人类社会发展史是一部多元文明共生并进的历史。不同国家、地区、民族，不同历史、宗教、习俗，彼此交相辉映、相因相生，共同擘画出这个精彩纷呈的世界。
-- Let us promote mutual learning through people-to-people exchanges. Human history is one of civilizations living and prospering together in diversity. Countries, regions and ethnic groups with varied histories, religions and customs have offered inspirations to each other and together contributed to a diverse and colorful world.
金砖国家为世界文明交流提供了最佳实践。近年来，五国人文交流如火如荼，电影节、运动会、合拍电影和纪录片等老百姓喜闻乐见的活动逐渐铺开，正在五国间架起一座坚实的民心之桥。我们应该保持势头，再接再厉，不断拓展人文交流广度和深度。在这个基础上，我们要以“金砖+”合作为平台，加强同不同文明、不同国家的交流对话，让金砖的朋友圈越来越大，伙伴网越来越广。
We the BRICS countries have many best practices to offer when it comes to cultural interactions. Over recent years, we have carried out flourishing cultural exchanges. Film festivals, sports games as well as film and documentary co-production have rolled in to the delight of our people, thus creating a bridge for our people to be brought still closer together. We need to sustain and build up this momentum to take our people-to-people exchanges to greater breadth and depth. On that basis, we can leverage "BRICS Plus" cooperation as a platform to increase dialogue with other countries and civilizations and win BRICS more friends and partners.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。70年来，在中国共产党领导下，中国人民自力更生、艰苦奋斗，在实践中开辟出中国特色社会主义道路，踏上了中华民族伟大复兴的时代征程。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. Over the past seven decades, working under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the resilient and assiduous Chinese people have blazed a trail of socialism with Chinese characteristics and embarked on an epic journey toward national rejuvenation.
中国将坚持扩大对外开放，增加商品和服务进口，扩大外资市场准入，加强知识产权保护，形成全方位、多层次、宽领域的全面开放新格局。
Going forward, China will open up still wider. We will import more goods and services, ease market access for foreign investments, and step up intellectual property protection. With these efforts, we will break new ground in pursuing all-dimensional, multi-tiered and all-sectoral opening-up in China.
中国将遵循共商共建共享原则，秉持开放绿色廉洁理念，追求高质量、惠民生、可持续目标，与各国一道，推进高质量共建“一带一路”。
China will continue to act in the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, and pursue open, green, and clean cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative. We will continue to follow a high-standard, people-centered, and sustainable approach to promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation with partner countries.
中国将继续奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，始终不渝走和平发展道路，在和平共处五项原则基础上发展同各国友好合作关系。我们致力于落实中非合作论坛成果，共筑更加紧密的中非命运共同体。我们致力于在政治、经贸、人文、国际和地区事务等领域加强同拉美地区合作，努力构建携手共进的中拉命运共同体。我们将着眼未来，深化亚太伙伴关系，致力于构建开放包容、创新增长、互联互通、合作共赢的亚太命运共同体。总之，我们愿同国际社会一道努力，朝着构建新型国际关系、构建人类命运共同体的目标不断迈进！
China will stay committed to an independent foreign policy of peace and to the path of peaceful development. We will continue to enhance friendship and cooperation with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. To be more specific, China will deliver the follow-ups to the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) and work with Africa for an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future; China will pursue closer cooperation with Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) in political, economic, trade, cultural, and regional and international affairs and build a China-LAC community with a shared future and common progress; and China will take a long-term perspective, deepen the Asia-Pacific partnership, and work for an Asia-Pacific community with a shared future of openness and inclusiveness, innovation-driven growth, greater connectivity, and mutually beneficial cooperation. All in all, China will work with the rest of the international community toward the goal of building a new type of international relationship and of building a community with a shared future for mankind.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
历史可鉴，未来可期。让我们在打造第二个“金色十年”征程中，携手努力、砥砺前行，共同谱写金砖合作、南南合作、世界各国互利合作的新篇章！
A review of historic achievements gives ample room of expectation for the future. As we enter the second "Golden Decade" of BRICS cooperation, let us work in concert and with continued efforts to write a new chapter in not only BRICS cooperation but also South-South cooperation and the mutually beneficial cooperation of countries around the world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
4. 习近平在G20领导人第15次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
勠力战疫　共创未来
Together, Let Us Fight COVID-19 and Create a Better Future
——在二十国集团领导人第十五次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
（2020年11月21日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At Session I of the 15th G20 Leaders’ Summit
Beijing, 21 November 2020
尊敬的萨勒曼国王，
各位同事：
Your Majesty King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud,
Dear Colleagues,
首先，我谨对沙特阿拉伯作为主席国，特别是国王陛下本人，为举办这次峰会付出的巨大努力表示衷心感谢！
I wish to begin by expressing heartfelt thanks to the Saudi Presidency and especially Your Majesty King Salman for the tremendous efforts in hosting this summit.
即将过去的一年，人类经历了百年来最严重的传染病大流行，超过百万人失去生命，世界经济陷入衰退，社会民生遭遇重创，影响超出2008年发生的国际金融危机。
This outgoing year, humanity has experienced the most serious global pandemic in a century. Over one million people have lost their lives. The world economy is in recession. Societies and livelihoods are taking a big hit. The impact of COVID-19 is even worse than that of the 2008 global financial crisis.
疫情发生后，二十国集团迅速行动起来，领导人特别峰会提出，加强防控合作，推动药物和疫苗研发，维护经济金融稳定，确保产业链、供应链畅通，缓解发展中国家债务负担。这些举措给世界带来信心，为全球抗疫合作引领了方向。在这场应对新冠肺炎疫情的全球战役中，二十国集团再次发挥了不可替代的重要作用。
The G20 has taken swift actions in the wake of COVID-19. At the Extraordinary Summit earlier this year, we agreed to step up cooperation to fight the pandemic. We agreed to advance the R&D of medicines and vaccines, maintain economic and financial stability, keep the industrial and supply chains open, and ease the debt burden of developing countries. These measures have given the world confidence and charted the course for international cooperation against the virus. In this global battle, the G20 has once again played an important and, indeed, irreplaceable role.
当前，全球疫情仍在蔓延，一些国家面临第二波疫情威胁，各国抗疫情、稳经济、保民生之路任重道远。与此同时，国际格局加速演变，单边主义、保护主义上升，全球产业链、供应链受到冲击。我们要在做好常态化疫情防控的同时，努力稳定和恢复经济。我建议，二十国集团在以下几个方面进一步发力。
As we speak, the pandemic is still wreaking havoc across the world, and some countries face the threat of a second wave of infections. To contain the virus, stabilize the economy and protect livelihood remains a long and arduous journey for all countries. In the meantime, the international architecture is evolving at a faster pace. Rising unilateralism and protectionism are causing disruptions to global industrial and supply chains. While containing the virus on an ongoing basis, we must also stabilize and restore economic growth. For the G20, I believe more efforts are needed in the following areas:
第一，构筑全球抗疫防火墙。我们首先要做好各自疫情防控，加强交流合作，并向其他国家施以援手。不少二十国集团成员在疫苗研发和生产方面取得积极进展，要加快行动，并支持世界卫生组织协调整合资源，公平有效分配疫苗。中国积极支持并参与新冠肺炎疫苗国际合作，已经加入“新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”，愿同各国在开展疫苗研发、生产、分配等各环节加强合作。我们将履行承诺，向其他发展中国家提供帮助和支持，努力让疫苗成为各国人民用得上、用得起的公共产品。
First, build a global firewall against COVID-19. We must first put the disease under control at home and, on that basis, strengthen exchanges and cooperation to help countries in need. Several G20 members have made progress in vaccine R&D and production. We should speed up action and support the WHO in mobilizing and consolidating resources and distributing vaccines fairly and efficiently. China actively supports and participates in international cooperation on COVID-19 vaccines. We have joined the COVAX facility and stand ready to step up cooperation with other countries on the R&D, production and distribution of vaccines. We will honor our commitment of giving assistance and support to other developing countries, and work to make vaccines a global public good accessible and affordable to people around the world.
第二，畅通世界经济运行脉络。要在做好疫情防控前提下，恢复全球产业链、供应链安全顺畅运转，降低关税、减少壁垒，探讨重要医疗物资贸易自由化。要加强政策、标准对接，搭建“快捷通道”，便利人员有序往来。中方提出建立基于核酸检测结果、以国际通行二维码为形式的健康码国际互认机制，希望更多国家参与。同时，我们支持二十国集团继续就便利人员往来和货物流通开展机制化合作，搭建全球合作网络。
Second, ensure the smooth functioning of the global economy. While containing the virus, we need to restore the secure and smooth operation of global industrial and supply chains. We need to reduce tariffs and barriers, and explore the liberalization of trade of key medical supplies. We need to further harmonize policies and standards and establish “fast tracks” to facilitate the orderly flow of personnel. China has proposed a global mechanism on the mutual recognition of health certificates based on nucleic acid test results in the form of internationally accepted QR codes. We hope more countries will join this mechanism. We also support the G20 in carrying out institutionalized cooperation and building global cooperation networks to facilitate the flow of personnel and goods.
第三，发挥数字经济的推动作用。疫情激发了5G、人工智能、智慧城市等新技术、新业态、新平台蓬勃兴起，网上购物、在线教育、远程医疗等“非接触经济”全面提速，为经济发展提供了新路径。我们要主动应变、化危为机，深化结构性改革，以科技创新和数字化变革催生新的发展动能。我们要为数字经济营造有利发展环境，加强数据安全合作，加强数字基础设施建设，为各国科技企业创造公平竞争环境。同时，要解决数字经济给就业、税收以及社会弱势群体带来的挑战，弥合数字鸿沟。
Third, harness the role of the digital economy. COVID-19 has fueled the boom of new technologies, new business forms and new platforms such as 5G, artificial intelligence (AI) and smart cities, and accelerated the development of a contact-free economy like online shopping, online education and telemedicine. All this opens new pathways for economic growth. We ought to adapt to change and turn crisis into opportunity. We may deepen structural reform and cultivate new growth drivers through scientific and technological innovation and digital transformation. We could foster an enabling environment for the development of the digital economy, enhance data security cooperation, strengthen the digital infrastructure, and level the playing field for high-tech companies from all countries. Meanwhile, we need to address the challenges posed by the digital economy to employment, taxation and vulnerable groups, and seek to bridge the digital divide.
第四，实现更加包容的发展。我们要继续帮助发展中国家克服疫情带来的困难。中方克服困难，全面落实二十国集团缓债倡议，总额超过13亿美元。中方支持延长缓债倡议期限的决定，将继续同各方一道全力落实，并将对确有困难的国家加大缓债减债力度，鼓励金融机构按市场化原则自主提供新增融资。我们要帮助妇女摆脱疫情影响，关注妇女特殊需要，落实《北京宣言》和《行动纲领》。中方已倡议在2025年再次召开全球妇女峰会，为推动后疫情时代妇女事业发展贡献力量。此外，我们还要高度重视粮食安全挑战，支持联合国明年举办世界粮食峰会。中方倡议适时召开国际粮食减损大会，欢迎二十国集团成员和相关国际组织积极参与。
Fourth, pursue more inclusive development. We should keep our support for developing countries and help them overcome the hardships caused by the pandemic. In spite of its own difficulties, China has fully implemented the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) and put off debt repayment totaling over US$1.3 billion. China supports the decision on DSSI extension and will continue to work with other parties for its full implementation. Meanwhile, China will increase the level of debt suspension and relief for countries facing particular difficulties and encourage its financial institutions to provide new financing support on a voluntary basis and according to market principles. We should help women walk out of the shadow of the pandemic, address their special needs, and implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. China has proposed the convening of another Global Leaders’ Meeting on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in 2025 to contribute to women’s development in the post-COVID era. It is also vital that we take the challenge of food security seriously and support the UN in holding the Food Systems Summit next year. In this connection, China proposes the holding of an international conference on food loss and waste in due course, and welcomes the active participation of G20 members and relevant international organizations.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
新冠肺炎疫情是一次重大挑战，凸显了全球治理存在的短板。国际社会都很关心后疫情时代的国际秩序和全球治理，也很关注二十国集团将发挥什么样的作用。我认为，我们应该遵循共商共建共享原则，坚持多边主义，坚持开放包容，坚持互利合作，坚持与时俱进。二十国集团应该在这方面发挥更大引领作用。
The grave challenge of COVID-19 has exposed the deficiencies of global governance. The international community has a keen interest in the post-COVID international order and global governance as well as the future role for the G20. In my view, the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits should guide our way forward. We should uphold multilateralism, pursue openness and inclusiveness, promote mutually beneficial cooperation and keep pace with the times. The G20 ought to play a bigger role in this process.
第一，加强以联合国为核心的国际体系。联合国是合作处理国际事务的核心机制。各方应该坚定维护联合国权威和地位，恪守联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序。我们支持联合国更有效地凝聚全球共识，动员全球资源，协调全球行动，为世界和平与发展发挥更大作用。
First, we need to strengthen the UN-centered international system. The UN is the core institution for addressing international affairs through cooperation. All countries should firmly support the UN’s authority and standing, follow the purposes and principles of its Charter, and uphold the international order underpinned by international law. We support the UN in more effectively building global consensus, mobilizing global resources and coordinating global actions. We support a bigger role of the UN in promoting world peace and development.
第二，完善经济全球化的治理架构。要坚定维护以规则为基础、透明、非歧视、开放、包容的多边贸易体制，支持世界贸易组织改革，增强其有效性和权威性，促进自由贸易，反对单边主义和保护主义，维护公平竞争，保障发展中国家发展权益和空间。要继续改革国际金融体系，按期完成国际货币基金组织第十六轮份额检查，扩大特别提款权作用，筑牢全球金融安全网，提高发展中国家代表性和发言权。要直面经济全球化遇到的挑战，使经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
Second, we need to improve the governance architecture for economic globalization. We should firmly safeguard the rules-based multilateral trading system that is transparent, nondiscriminatory, open and inclusive, and support the reform of the WTO to enhance its effectiveness and authority. We should promote free trade, oppose unilateralism and protectionism, uphold fair competition, and protect the development rights, interests and space of developing countries. We should continue the reform of the international financial system, conclude the IMF’s 16th General Quota Review on schedule, expand the role of the Special Drawing Rights, buttress the global financial safety net, and raise the representation and voice of developing countries. We should also address the challenges to economic globalization head-on, and make it more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
第三，推动数字经济健康发展。面对各国对数据安全、数字鸿沟、个人隐私、道德伦理等方面的关切，我们要秉持以人为中心、基于事实的政策导向，鼓励创新，建立互信，支持联合国就此发挥领导作用，携手打造开放、公平、公正、非歧视的数字发展环境。前不久，中方提出了《全球数据安全倡议》。我们愿以此为基础，同各方探讨并制定全球数字治理规则。中方支持围绕人工智能加强对话，倡议适时召开专题会议，推动落实二十国集团人工智能原则，引领全球人工智能健康发展。二十国集团还要以开放和包容方式探讨制定法定数字货币标准和原则，在共同推动国际货币体系向前发展过程中，妥善应对各类风险挑战。
Third, we need to promote the sound development of the digital economy. To address countries’ concerns on data security, the digital divide, personal privacy and ethics, we should adopt people-centered and facts-based policies to encourage innovation and build trust. We should support the UN’s leadership role in this field, and work together to foster an open, fair, just and nondiscriminatory environment for building the digital economy. Recently, China launched the Global Initiative on Data Security. We may work on that basis and join other parties for discussing and formulating rules on global digital governance. China supports increased dialogue on AI, and proposes a meeting on this in due course to advance the G20 AI Principles and set the course for the healthy development of AI globally. The G20 also needs to discuss developing the standards and principles for central bank digital currencies with an open and accommodating attitude, and properly handle all types of risks and challenges while pushing collectively for the development of the international monetary system.
第四，提高应对全球性挑战的能力。当前，最紧迫的任务是加强全球公共卫生体系，防控新冠肺炎疫情和其他传染性疾病。要加强世界卫生组织作用，推进全球疾病大流行防范应对，扎牢维护人类健康安全的篱笆，构建人类卫生健康共同体。要加大生态环境领域国际合作力度，保护好地球这个我们赖以生存的共同家园。要进一步减少非必要一次性塑料制品生产和使用。要以明年联合国第二十六次气候变化缔约方大会和第十五次《生物多样性公约》缔约方大会为契机，凝聚更多共识，形成更大合力，共同建设清洁美丽的世界，实现人与自然和谐共存。中方呼吁全面禁止非法交易野生动物，加强野生动植物保护交流和合作。
Fourth, we need to build up capacities for tackling global challenges. The most pressing task of the moment is to shore up the global public health system and contain COVID-19 and other infectious diseases. We need to enhance the role of the WHO, improve pandemic preparedness and response, forge a strong shield for human health and safety, and build a global community of health for all. We need to scale up international cooperation on ecology and environment to protect the planet Earth, our only homeland. We need to further curtail the production and use of non-essential, disposable plastic goods. COP26 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and COP15 of the Convention on Biological Diversity, both to be held next year, may serve as opportunities for forging broader consensus and stronger synergy in building a clean and beautiful world where man and nature coexist in harmony. China calls for a complete ban on illegal trade of wildlife and for stronger exchanges and cooperation on the protection of wild fauna and flora.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
中国在取得抗疫斗争重大战略成果基础上，实现了经济稳步前行。不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。构建新发展格局绝不是闭关内顾，而是要从供给和需求两端同时发力，全面畅通生产、分配、流通、消费各环节，在提高经济韧性和竞争力的同时，建设更高水平的开放型经济新体制。这将为各国共享中国经济高质量发展成果带来更多机遇。
Building on its major strategic gains in fighting COVID-19, China has made steady strides in economic development. The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. This new development paradigm is by no means a closed-door policy. Instead, it urges efforts on both the supply and demand sides to ensure unimpeded flow in production, distribution, exchange and consumption. While making the Chinese economy more resilient and competitive, it also aims to build a new system of open economy of higher standards. This will create more opportunities for the world to benefit from China’s high-quality development.
中国将始终坚持做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。我们愿同所有国家在相互尊重、平等互利基础上和平共处、共同发展，以对话弥合分歧，以谈判化解争端，为世界和平与发展作出共同努力。
China will always be a builder of global peace, a contributor to global development and a defender of international order. On the basis of mutual respect, equality and mutual benefit, China stands ready to pursue peaceful coexistence and common development with all countries. We may bridge differences through dialogue, resolve disputes through negotiation, and make a joint effort for world peace and development.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
“沉舟侧畔千帆过，病树前头万木春。”后疫情时代的世界，必将如凤凰涅槃、焕发新生。让我们携手努力，共同创造更加美好幸福的生活，共同推动构建人类命运共同体！
As a Chinese poem reads, “Past a fallen ship, one thousand sail onward; for a sick tree, ten thousand thrive by spring.” I believe that when COVID-19 is over, our world will rise from the pandemic and emerge even stronger. In that spirit, let us join hands to deliver a better life for our people and build a community with a shared future for mankind.
8. 习近平在上合组织成员国元首理事会第20次会议上的讲话
弘扬“上海精神”　深化团结协作
构建更加紧密的命运共同体
Carrying Forward the Shanghai Spirit and Deepening Solidarity and Collaboration
for a Stronger Community with a Shared Future
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第二十次会议上的讲话
（2020年11月10日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the 20th Meeting of the Council of Heads of State of
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Beijing, 10 November 2020
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Dear Colleagues,
感谢普京总统和俄方作为轮值主席国为本次会议所做的精心准备。俄方认真履行主席国职责，克服新冠肺炎疫情影响，推动上海合作组织保持良好发展势头。中方对此高度评价。
Let me begin by thanking President Putin and Russia for the thoughtful organization of this meeting. During its presidency of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), Russia has earnestly performed its duties and advanced the SCO’s sound development despite the impact of COVID-19. China highly commends Russia for its contribution.
上海合作组织成立以来，走过了不平凡的发展历程，经历了时间检验，成为欧亚地区和国际事务中重要的建设性力量。成员国遵循“上海精神”，加强政治、经济、安全、人文等领域合作，树立了相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系典范。新冠肺炎疫情发生后，各方同舟共济、守望相助，为本组织稳定发展和国际抗疫合作注入了正能量。
Since its founding, the SCO has traveled an extraordinary journey. It has stood the test of time and become a major constructive force in the Eurasian region and global affairs. Committed to the Shanghai Spirit, SCO members have enhanced cooperation in the political, economic, security, people-to-people and cultural fields, setting an example for a new type of international relations that features mutual respect, equity, justice and win-win cooperation. In the face of COVID-19, we have backed each other up to tide over the difficulties together. Such solidarity has injected positive energy into both the SCO’s steady development and international cooperation against the coronavirus.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
新冠肺炎疫情加速了国际格局调整，世界进入动荡变革期。国际社会正在经历多边和单边、开放和封闭、合作和对抗的重大考验。“世界怎么了，我们怎么办”成为时代之问。
The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated shifts in the international landscape. The world is entering a period of turbulence and transformation. The international community now faces a major test with choices to be made between multilateralism and unilateralism, openness and seclusion, cooperation and confrontation. “What is going on with the world?” “What shall we do about it?” — These are the questions awaiting answers from the people of our time.
“察势者明，趋势者智。”人类生活在同一个地球村，各国利益休戚与共、命运紧密相连。各国人民对美好生活的向往更加强烈，和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流不可阻挡。历史已经并将继续证明，睦邻友好必将超越以邻为壑，互利合作必将取代零和博弈，多边主义必将战胜单边主义。
Ancient Chinese teachings tell us that “men of insight see the trend, while men of wisdom ride it”. Humanity lives in a global village where the interests and destinies of all countries are intertwined. People across the world increasingly yearn for a better life. The trend toward peace, development, cooperation and mutual benefit is unstoppable. History has proven and will continue to prove that good-neighborliness will prevail over a beggar-thy-neighbor approach, mutually beneficial cooperation will replace zero-sum game, and multilateralism will win over unilateralism.
当前形势下，上海合作组织要弘扬“上海精神”，深化团结协作，为地区国家稳定和发展作出更大贡献，为推动构建人类命运共同体作出更多实践探索。
In the current circumstances, the SCO is required to carry forward the Shanghai Spirit and deepen solidarity and collaboration. Together, we will contribute more to the stability and development of countries in the region and take more steps toward building a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，加强抗疫合作，构建卫生健康共同体。新冠肺炎疫情仍在持续蔓延。病毒不分国界，团结合作是抗击疫情最有力的武器，全力挽救生命是当务之急。
First, we need to step up anti-epidemic cooperation and build a community of health for us all. Right now, COVID-19 is still presenting an ongoing threat. To fight the virus that respects no borders, we must take up the most powerful weapon of solidarity and cooperation, and rise up to the most imperative task of saving people’s lives.
我们要加强各国联防联控，支持彼此抗疫努力，维护地区和全球公共卫生安全。要支持世界卫生组织发挥关键领导作用，反对将疫情政治化、病毒标签化，共同抵制“政治病毒”。要用好本组织卫生领域合作机制，深化疫情监测、科研攻关、疾病防治等领域交流合作。中方倡议成员国疾控中心设立热线联系，及时通报跨境传染病信息。传统医学在抗击疫情中显示出独特价值和重要作用。我们要继续办好本组织传统医学论坛，深化交流互鉴。疫苗对人类战胜疫情至关重要。中方已经加入“全球新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”，愿积极考虑本组织国家疫苗需求，支持各国保护人民生命安全和身体健康。
We need to strengthen our joint response to COVID-19, support each other’s containment efforts, and uphold regional and global public health security. We need to support the World Health Organization’s crucial leadership role, oppose attempts to politicize the pandemic or mislabel the coronavirus, and jointly resist any “political virus”. We need to put the SCO’s health cooperation mechanisms into full use, and deepen exchanges and cooperation in epidemic monitoring, scientific research, and disease control and treatment. China proposes that hotline contacts be created between SCO members’ centers for disease control (CDCs) for timely updates on cross-border transmission of communicable diseases. The unique value and important role of traditional medicine has been highlighted in the battle against COVID-19, and we need to continue to hold the SCO Forum on Traditional Medicine to deepen exchanges and mutual learning in this field. Vaccines play a vital role in defeating the virus. China has joined the COVAX facility, and will actively consider SCO countries’ need for vaccines to help protect people’s safety and health in our countries.
第二，维护安全和稳定，构建安全共同体。安全和稳定是国家发展的首要前提，关乎各国核心利益。我们要遵循共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，有效应对各类威胁和挑战，营造良好地区安全环境。
Second, we need to safeguard security and stability and build a community of security for us all. Security and stability are the number one precondition for a country’s development, and thus concern the core interests of all countries. We need to act on the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, address all forms of threats and challenges effectively, and foster a sound security environment in our region.
我们要坚定支持有关国家依法平稳推进重大国内政治议程，坚定支持各国维护政治安全和社会稳定，坚决反对外部势力以任何借口干涉成员国内政。要深化团结互信，坚持通过对话和协商化解矛盾和分歧，巩固本组织发展政治基础。要严防“三股势力”借疫生乱，遏制毒品泛滥趋势，打击极端主义思想通过互联网传播，提升成员国执法安全合作水平。要重视维护生物安全、数据安全、外空安全，积极开展沟通和对话。中方发起“全球数据安全倡议”，旨在共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作、有序的网络空间，欢迎各方参与。阿富汗局势事关地区安全和稳定，要用好“上海合作组织－阿富汗联络组”平台，帮助阿富汗实现和平重建。
We need to firmly support countries concerned in their law-based efforts to steadily advance major domestic political agenda, firmly support countries in safeguarding political security and social stability, and firmly oppose interference by external forces in the domestic affairs of SCO members under whatever pretexts. We need to deepen solidarity and mutual trust, and resolve disputes and differences through dialogue and consultation, in order to cement the political foundation for SCO development. It is important that we forestall terrorist, separatist and extremist attempts to exploit the pandemic for disruption, curb the proliferation of drugs, crack down on Internet-based propagation of extremist ideology, and deepen SCO members’ law-enforcement cooperation. It is important that we uphold bio-security, data security and outer-space security, and engage in active communication and dialogue in this field. China has launched the Global Initiative on Data Security, which aims to galvanize efforts to shape a peaceful, secure, open, cooperative and orderly cyberspace. We welcome the participation of all parties in this Initiative. The situation in Afghanistan involves the security and stability in the wider region. We need to make good use of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group to help the country realize peace and reconstruction.
第三，深化务实合作，构建发展共同体。大家一起发展才是真发展，可持续发展才是好发展。我们要秉持创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，拓展务实合作空间，助力经济复苏、民生改善。
Third, we need to deepen practical cooperation and build a community of development for us all. True development is development for all and good development is sustainable. We need to be guided by the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development and open up more opportunities for practical cooperation to facilitate economic recovery and betterment of people’s lives.
我们要继续推动共建“一带一路”倡议同各国发展战略及欧亚经济联盟等区域合作倡议深入对接，加强互联互通，促进产业链、供应链、价值链深度融合，畅通区域经济循环。要通过人员往来“快捷通道”和货物运输“绿色通道”，加快实现复工复产。要为各国企业营造开放、公平、非歧视的营商环境，扩大相互投资规模。要抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革机遇，加强数字经济、电子商务、人工智能、智慧城市等领域合作。中方将于明年在重庆举行中国－上海合作组织数字经济产业论坛，为各方开展创新合作搭建平台。要坚持以人为本，共同实施更多民生工程。中方支持设立本组织减贫联合工作组，愿同各方分享减贫成功经验。
We need to forge greater synergy of the Belt and Road Initiative with national development strategies as well as region-wide cooperation initiatives such as the Eurasian Economic Union. We need to enhance connectivity and further integrate our industrial, supply and value chains for unimpeded economic circulation in the region. We need to facilitate reopening of economic activities through the “fast track” that steps up mobility of people and the “green lane” that quickens the flow of goods. We need to foster an open, fair and nondiscriminatory business environment for each other’s companies, and expand mutual investment among us. We need to seize opportunities from the new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation to step up cooperation in digital economy, e-commerce, artificial intelligence and smart cities. Next year, China will host a China-SCO forum on the digital economy industry in Chongqing, which will provide a platform for innovation cooperation among parties. We need to put the people first, and implement more joint projects that deliver real benefits to them. China supports setting up an SCO joint working group on poverty reduction and stands ready to share our good experience with other parties.
第四，促进民心相通，构建人文共同体。文明没有优劣之分，只有特色之别。我们要促进文明互学互鉴，增进各国睦邻友好，夯实上海合作组织长远发展民意基础。
Fourth, we need to nourish people-to-people amity and build a community of cultural exchanges for us all. Each civilization is distinct and none is superior to others. We need to promote mutual learning between our civilizations and enhance good-neighborliness and friendship between our countries. This allows us to enhance public support for the SCO’s long-term development.
我们要积极利用各种媒介，广泛宣传本组织发展成就，使本组织合作理念更加深入人心。要支持本组织教育、文化、旅游、体育、媒体、妇女等领域交流合作，形成全方位、深层次、多渠道合作架构。中方将于明年举办上海合作组织民间友好论坛，继续办好上海合作组织青年交流营活动，在未来3年为各方提供600名青年交流名额，培养相知相亲的青年一代。
We may use various forms of communication to make the SCO’s achievements more widely known and win stronger public support for the SCO vision of cooperation. We may support the Organization’s exchanges and cooperation in education, culture, sports, media and women’s welfare, and institute an all-round, multi-channel structure of deeper cooperation. China will host an SCO non-governmental friendship forum next year, and will continue to hold SCO Youth Campus events, to which 600 young people will be invited in the coming three years, to deepen mutual understanding among the younger generation and bring them closer together.
我们要统筹推进常态化疫情防控和本组织各领域合作，创新工作方法，采用灵活方式开展合作，保持相关机制有效运转。秘书处和地区反恐怖机构要发挥好协调作用，成员国也要加大力度支持常设机构工作。
We may better coordinate the SCO’s cooperation agenda with the necessity for a long-term fight against COVID-19. We may employ new working methods and flexible cooperation forms and keep the relevant mechanisms running effectively. The SCO Secretariat and the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure need to play their coordinating role, and SCO members need to give stronger support to the work of the Permanent Bodies.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
75年前，我们的先辈赢得了世界反法西斯战争的胜利，建立了联合国，谱写了人类历史新篇章。我们要以史为鉴，以实际行动践行多边主义、完善全球治理、维护国际秩序。要秉持共商共建共享原则，倡导全球事务由各国一起商量着办，治理体系由大家携手建设，发展成果由各国人民共同分享。
Seventy-five years ago, our forefathers won the world anti-fascist war and founded the United Nations (UN), thus writing a new chapter in human history. Drawing lessons from the past, we need to act to champion multilateralism, improve global governance and uphold the international order. We need to follow the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, and build a world where global affairs are discussed by all, the governance system built by all, and development fruits shared by all.
上海合作组织要拓展伙伴关系网络，同观察员国、对话伙伴以及联合国等国际组织广泛开展合作，在国际和地区事务中发挥更加积极作用，致力于建设持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。
The SCO needs to expand its network of partnerships and conduct extensive cooperation with observers, dialogue partners, the UN and other international organizations. It should play a more active role in international and regional affairs, and stay committed to building an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
中国的发展离不开世界，世界的繁荣也需要中国。中国正在加快形成以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局，建设更高水平开放型经济新体制。中国将坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略，从世界汲取发展动力，也让中国发展更好惠及世界。欢迎各方把握中国发展新机遇，积极深化对华合作。
China cannot be separated from the world in achieving development, and the world also needs China for prosperity. Now, China is speeding up efforts to foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. New mechanisms are being put in place to build an open economy of a higher standard. China will remain committed to a win-win strategy of opening-up. It will seek development impetus from the world and contribute more to the world with its own development. We welcome all parties to capitalize on China’s development opportunity and make active endeavors to deepen cooperation with China.
中方祝贺拉赫蒙总统接任元首理事会主席，将积极支持塔方主席国工作。明年本组织将迎来成立20周年华诞。让我们高举“上海精神”旗帜，精诚合作、砥砺前行，推动本组织得到更大发展，构建更加紧密的命运共同体！
China congratulates President Emomali Rahmon on taking over the chairmanship of the SCO Council of Heads of State, and will give full support to Tajikistan during its presidency. Next year, we will celebrate the 20th anniversary of the SCO. Let us hold high the banner of the Shanghai Spirit, forge ahead with strong cooperation, strive for the better development of our Organization, and build an even closer community with a shared future for us all.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
14. 习近平在中非团结抗疫特别峰会上的主旨讲话
团结抗疫　共克时艰
Defeating COVID-19 with Solidarity and Cooperation
——在中非团结抗疫特别峰会上的主旨讲话
（2020年6月17日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Extraordinary China-Africa Summit
On Solidarity Against COVID-19
Beijing, 17 June 2020
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的萨勒总统，
尊敬的各位国家元首、政府首脑，
尊敬的非洲联盟委员会主席法基先生，
尊敬的联合国秘书长古特雷斯先生，
尊敬的世界卫生组织总干事谭德塞先生，
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa,
Your Excellency President Macky Sall,
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Your Excellency Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Your Excellency António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Your Excellency Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization,
在全球抗击新冠肺炎疫情的重要时刻，我们举行这次中非特别峰会，同各位新老朋友通过视频相聚，共商团结抗疫大计，共叙中非兄弟情谊。感谢拉马福萨总统、萨勒总统同我一道倡议举办这次会议，感谢各位同事出席会议。我也向未出席会议的非洲各国领导人表示诚挚的问候！
At such a critical moment in the global fight against COVID-19, we are gathered together in this Extraordinary China-Africa Summit. Friends old and new are connected via video link to discuss our joint response to COVID-19 and to renew the fraternity between China and Africa. I thank President Ramaphosa and President Sall for joining me in initiating the Summit, and I appreciate the participation of all colleagues present. I also want to send my regards to other African leaders who are not able to be with us today.
这次疫情突如其来，给世界各国带来严重冲击，夺走数十万人宝贵生命。在此，我提议，我们为在疫情中的不幸罹难者默哀，向他们的亲人表示慰问。
The sudden onslaught of COVID-19 has taken a heavy toll on countries around the world, with the loss of several hundred thousand precious lives. Here, I suggest that we observe a moment of silence for those who have tragically passed away due to COVID-19 and express our condolences to their families.
——面对疫情，中国和非洲经受了严峻考验。中国人民经过艰苦卓绝努力，付出巨大代价，控制住国内疫情，但仍面临反弹压力。非洲各国政府和人民众志成城，非洲联盟全力协调，采取有力举措，有效缓解了疫情，成果来之不易。
— In the face of COVID-19, China and Africa have withstood the test of a severe challenge. The Chinese people have put up a fierce fight and made enormous sacrifice to bring the situation in China under control. Still, we remain mindful of the risk of a resurgence. In the same spirit, governments and peoples in Africa have put up a united front and, under the effective coordination by the African Union, have taken strong measures to effectively slow the spread of the virus. These are indeed hard-won results.
——面对疫情，中国和非洲相互声援、并肩战斗。在中国抗疫最艰难的时刻，非洲送来宝贵支持，我们铭记于心。非洲疫情暴发后，中国率先驰援，同非洲人民坚定站在一起。
— In the face of COVID-19, China and Africa have offered mutual support and fought shoulder to shoulder with each other. China shall always remember the invaluable support Africa gave us at the height of our battle with the coronavirus. In return, when Africa was struck by the virus, China was the first to rush in with assistance and has since stood firm with the African people.
——面对疫情，中非双方更加团结，友好互信更加巩固。我愿重申，中方珍视中非传统友谊，无论国际风云如何变幻，中方加强中非团结合作的决心绝不会动摇。
— In the face of COVID-19, China and Africa have enhanced solidarity and strengthened friendship and mutual trust. Let me reaffirm China’s commitment to its longstanding friendship with Africa. No matter how the international landscape may evolve, China shall never waver in its determination to pursue greater solidarity and cooperation with Africa.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
当前，疫情仍在全球蔓延，中国和非洲都面临抗疫情、稳经济、保民生的艰巨任务。我们要坚持人民至上、生命至上，统筹资源，团结合作，尽最大努力保护人民生命安全和身体健康，最大限度降低疫情负面影响。
COVID-19 is still affecting many parts of the world. Both China and Africa face the formidable task of combating the virus while stabilizing the economy and protecting people’s livelihoods. We must always put our people and their lives front and center. We must mobilize necessary resources, stick together in collaboration, and do whatever it takes to protect people’s lives and health and minimize the fallout of COVID-19.
第一，我们要坚定不移携手抗击疫情。中方将继续全力支持非方抗疫行动，抓紧落实我在世界卫生大会开幕式上宣布的举措，继续向非洲国家提供物资援助、派遣医疗专家组、协助非方来华采购抗疫物资。中方将提前于年内开工建设非洲疾控中心总部，同非方一道实施好中非合作论坛框架内“健康卫生行动”，加快中非友好医院建设和中非对口医院合作，共同打造中非卫生健康共同体。中方承诺，新冠疫苗研发完成并投入使用后，愿率先惠及非洲国家。
First, we must stay committed to fighting COVID-19 together. China will continue to do whatever it can to support Africa’s response to COVID-19. China will lose no time in following through on the measures I announced at the opening of the World Health Assembly, and continue to help African countries by providing supplies, sending expert teams, and facilitating Africa’s procurement of medical supplies in China. China will start ahead of schedule the construction of the Africa CDC headquarters this year. China will work with Africa to fully deliver the health care initiative adopted at the FOCAC Beijing Summit, and speed up the construction of China-Africa Friendship Hospitals and the cooperation between paired-up Chinese and African hospitals. Together, we will build a China-Africa community of health for all. We pledge that once the development and deployment of COVID-19 vaccine is completed in China, African countries will be among the first to benefit.
第二，我们要坚定不移推进中非合作。为克服疫情带来的冲击，我们要加强共建“一带一路”合作，加快落实中非合作论坛北京峰会成果，并将合作重点向健康卫生、复工复产、改善民生领域倾斜。
Second, we must stay committed to enhancing China-Africa cooperation. To cushion the impact of COVID-19, it is important to strengthen Belt and Road cooperation and accelerate the follow-ups to the FOCAC Beijing Summit. Greater priority needs to be given to cooperation on public health, economic reopening, and people’s livelihood.
中方将在中非合作论坛框架下免除有关非洲国家截至2020年底到期对华无息贷款债务。中方愿同国际社会一道，加大对疫情特别重、压力特别大的非洲国家的支持力度，包括进一步延长缓债期限，帮助其克服当前困难。中方鼓励中国有关金融机构参照二十国集团缓债倡议，根据市场原则同非洲国家就商业主权贷款安排进行友好协商。中方将同二十国集团成员一道落实二十国集团缓债倡议，并呼吁二十国集团在落实当前缓债倡议基础上，进一步延长对包括非洲国家在内的相关国家缓债期限。
Within the FOCAC framework, China will cancel the debt of relevant African countries in the form of interest-free government loans that are due to mature by the end of 2020. For those African countries that are hardest hit by the coronavirus and are under heavy financial stress, China will work with the global community to give them greater support, by such means as further extending the period of debt suspension, to help them tide over the current difficulty. We encourage Chinese financial institutions to respond to the G20’s Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) and to hold friendly consultations with African countries according to market principles to work out arrangements for commercial loans with sovereign guarantees. China will work with other members of the G20 to implement the DSSI and, on that basis, urge the G20 to extend debt service suspension still further for countries concerned, including those in Africa.
中方希望国际社会特别是发达国家和多边金融机构在非洲减缓债问题上采取更有力行动。中方愿在尊重非方意愿基础上，同联合国、世界卫生组织及其他伙伴开展援非抗疫合作。
China hopes that the international community, especially developed countries and multilateral financial institutions, will act more forcefully on debt relief and suspension for Africa. China will work with the UN, WHO and other partners to assist Africa’s response to COVID-19, and do it in a way that respects the will of Africa.
推动非洲实现可持续发展是长远之道。中方支持非洲大陆自由贸易区建设，支持非洲加强互联互通和保障产业链供应链建设，愿同非方一道，共同拓展数字经济、智慧城市、清洁能源、5G等新业态合作，促进非洲发展振兴。
To help Africa achieve sustainable development is what matters in the long run. China supports Africa in its effort to develop the African Continental Free Trade Area and to enhance connectivity and strengthen industrial and supply chains. China will explore broader cooperation with Africa in such new business forms as digital economy, smart city, clean energy, and 5G to boost Africa’s development and revitalization.
第三，我们要坚定不移践行多边主义。团结合作是抗击疫情最有力的武器。中方愿同非方一道，维护以联合国为核心的全球治理体系，支持世卫组织为全球抗疫作出更大贡献。我们反对将疫情政治化、病毒标签化，反对种族歧视和意识形态偏见，坚定捍卫国际公平正义。
Third, we must stay committed to upholding multilateralism. In the face of COVID-19, solidarity and cooperation is our most powerful weapon. China will work with Africa to uphold the UN-centered global governance system and support WHO in making greater contribution to the global COVID-19 response. We oppose politicization and stigmatization of COVID-19, and we oppose racial discrimination and ideological bias. We stand firm for equity and justice in the world.
第四，我们要坚定不移推进中非友好。当今世界正经历百年未有之大变局。面对新的机遇和挑战，中非比以往任何时候都更加需要加强合作。我愿同各位同事保持密切联系，夯实友好互信，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互支持，共同维护中非和发展中国家根本利益，推进中非全面战略合作伙伴关系高水平发展。
Fourth, we must stay committed to taking China-Africa friendship forward. The world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century. Given the new opportunities and challenges we face, closer cooperation between China and Africa is needed, more than ever. On my part, I will stay in close touch with all of you, my colleagues, to consolidate our friendship and mutual trust, support each other on issues involving our respective core interests, and advance the fundamental interests of China and Africa and, for that matter, of all developing countries. This way, we will be able to take the China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership to a greater height.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
我们在中非合作论坛北京峰会上一致决定构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体。今天我们召开团结抗疫特别峰会，就是用实际行动践行北京峰会承诺，也是为国际抗疫合作贡献力量。我相信，人类终将战胜疫情，中非人民也终将过上更加美好的生活。
At the FOCAC Beijing Summit, we agreed to work together to build an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future. Today’s Extraordinary China-Africa Summit on Solidarity against COVID-19 is our concrete step to deliver the commitment we made at the Beijing Summit and to do our part in the international cooperation against COVID-19. I am convinced that humanity will ultimately defeat the virus, and that the Chinese and African people are poised to embrace better days ahead.
谢谢。
Thank you.
16. 习近平在二十国集团领导人特别峰会上的重要讲话
携手抗疫　共克时艰
Working Together to Defeat the COVID-19 Outbreak——在二十国集团领导人特别峰会上的发言
（2020年3月26日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Extraordinary G20 Leaders' Summit
Beijing, 26 March 2020 尊敬的萨勒曼国王，
Your Majesty King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud,各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
大家好！首先，我谨对萨勒曼国王和沙特方面为这次会议所做的大量沟通协调工作，表示衷心的感谢！
It is good to join you. Let me begin by expressing my sincere appreciation to His Majesty King Salman and Saudi Arabia for having done tremendous work of communication and coordination to make this summit possible.
面对突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情，中国政府、中国人民不畏艰险，始终把人民生命安全和身体健康摆在第一位，按照坚定信心、同舟共济、科学防治、精准施策的总要求，坚持全民动员、联防联控、公开透明，打响了一场抗击疫情的人民战争。经过艰苦努力，付出巨大牺牲，目前中国国内疫情防控形势持续向好，生产生活秩序加快恢复，但我们仍然丝毫不能放松警惕。
Facing the COVID-19 outbreak that caught us all by surprise, the Chinese government and Chinese people have been undaunted as we took on this formidable task. From day one of our fight against the outbreak, we have put people's life and health first. We have acted according to the overall principle of shoring up confidence, strengthening unity, ensuring science-based control and treatment and imposing targeted measures. We have mobilized the whole nation, set up collective control and treatment mechanisms and acted with openness and transparency. What we fought was a people's war against the outbreak. We have put up a strenuous struggle and made tremendous sacrifices. Now the situation in China is moving steadily in a positive direction. Life and work are quickly returning to normal. Yet, there is no way we will lower our guard or relax control.
在中方最困难的时候，国际社会许多成员给予中方真诚帮助和支持，我们会始终铭记并珍视这份友谊。
At the most difficult moment in our fight against the outbreak, China received assistance and help from a lot of members of the global community. Such expressions of friendship will always be remembered and cherished by the Chinese people.
重大传染性疾病是全人类的敌人。新冠肺炎疫情正在全球蔓延，给人民生命安全和身体健康带来巨大威胁，给全球公共卫生安全带来巨大挑战，形势令人担忧。当前，国际社会最需要的是坚定信心、齐心协力、团结应对，全面加强国际合作，凝聚起战胜疫情强大合力，携手赢得这场人类同重大传染性疾病的斗争。
Major infectious disease is the enemy of all. As we speak, the COVID-19 outbreak is spreading worldwide, posing enormous threat to life and health and bringing formidable challenge to global public health security. The situation is disturbing and unsettling. At such a moment, it is imperative for the international community to strengthen confidence, act with unity and work together in a collective response. We must comprehensively step up international cooperation and foster greater synergy so that humanity as one could win the battle against such a major infectious disease.
在此，我愿提出以下4点倡议。
For that to happen, I would like to put forth four proposals.
第一，坚决打好新冠肺炎疫情防控全球阻击战。国际社会应该加紧行动起来，坚决遏制疫情蔓延势头。我愿在此提议，尽早召开二十国集团卫生部长会议，加强信息分享，开展药物、疫苗研发、防疫合作，有效防止疫情跨境传播。要携手帮助公共卫生体系薄弱的发展中国家提高应对能力。我建议发起二十国集团抗疫援助倡议，在世界卫生组织支持下加强信息沟通、政策协调、行动配合。中方秉持人类命运共同体理念，愿同各国分享防控有益做法，开展药物和疫苗联合研发，并向出现疫情扩散的国家提供力所能及的援助。
First, we need to be resolute in fighting an all-out global war against the COVID-19 outbreak. The community of nations must move swiftly to stem the spread of the virus. In this regard, I propose that a G20 health ministers' meeting be convened as quick as possible to improve information sharing, strengthen cooperation on drugs, vaccines and epidemic control, and cut off cross-border infections. G20 members need to jointly help developing countries with weak public health systems enhance preparedness and response. I propose a G20 COVID-19 assistance initiative for better information sharing and policy and action coordination with the support of the World Health Organization. Guided by the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, China will be more than ready to share our good practices, conduct joint research and development of drugs and vaccines, and provide assistance where we can to countries hit by the growing outbreak.
第二，有效开展国际联防联控。病毒无国界。疫情是我们的共同敌人。各国必须携手拉起最严密的联防联控网络。中方已经建立新冠肺炎疫情防控网上知识中心，向所有国家开放。要集各国之力，共同合作加快药物、疫苗、检测等方面科研攻关，力争早日取得惠及全人类的突破性成果。要探讨建立区域公共卫生应急联络机制，提高突发公共卫生事件应急响应速度。
Second, we need to make a collective response for control and treatment at the international level. This is a virus that respects no borders. The outbreak we are battling is our common enemy. All must work together to build a strongest global network of control and treatment that the world has ever seen. China has set up its online COVID-19 knowledge center that is open to all countries. It is imperative that countries pool their strengths and speed up research and development of drugs, vaccines and testing capabilities in the hope to achieve early breakthrough to the benefit of all. Discussions are also needed regarding the establishment of regional emergency liaison mechanisms to enable quicker response to public health emergencies.
第三，积极支持国际组织发挥作用。中方支持世界卫生组织发挥领导作用，制定科学合理防控措施，尽力阻止疫情跨境传播。我建议，二十国集团依托世界卫生组织加强疫情防控信息共享，推广全面系统有效的防控指南。要发挥二十国集团的沟通协调作用，加强政策对话和交流，适时举办全球公共卫生安全高级别会议。中国将同各国一道，加大对相关国际和地区组织的支持力度。
Third, we need to support international organizations in playing their active roles. China supports WHO in leading the global efforts to develop science-based and proper control and treatment and minimize cross-border spread. I call on G20 members to enhance anti-epidemic information sharing with the support of WHO and to promote control and treatment protocols that are comprehensive, systematic and effective. The G20 platform for communication and coordination may be used to increase policy dialogue and exchange, and a high-level meeting on international public health security may be convened in due course. For China, we will be happy to join other countries and scale up support for relevant international and regional organizations.
第四，加强国际宏观经济政策协调。疫情对全球生产和需求造成全面冲击，各国应该联手加大宏观政策对冲力度，防止世界经济陷入衰退。要实施有力有效的财政和货币政策，促进各国货币汇率基本稳定。要加强金融监管协调，维护全球金融市场稳定。要共同维护全球产业链供应链稳定，中国将加大力度向国际市场供应原料药、生活必需品、防疫物资等产品。要保护妇女儿童，保护老年人、残疾人等弱势群体，保障人民基本生活。中国将继续实施积极的财政政策和稳健的货币政策，坚定不移扩大改革开放，放宽市场准入，持续优化营商环境，积极扩大进口，扩大对外投资，为世界经济稳定作出贡献。
Fourth, we need to enhance international macro-economic policy coordination. The outbreak has disrupted production and demand across the globe. Countries need to leverage and coordinate their macro policies to counteract the negative impact and prevent the world economy from falling into recession. We need to implement strong and effective fiscal and monetary policies to keep our exchange rates basically stable. We need to better coordinate financial regulation to keep global financial markets stable. We need to jointly keep the global industrial and supply chains stable. What China will do in this regard is to increase its supply of active pharmaceutical ingredients, daily necessities, and anti-epidemic and other supplies to the international market. What's more, we also need to protect women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities and other vulnerable groups, and provide for people's basic needs. China will continue to pursue a proactive fiscal policy and prudent monetary policy. We will continue to advance reform and opening-up, widen market access, improve the business environment, and expand imports and outbound investment to contribute to a stable world economy.
我呼吁二十国集团成员采取共同举措，减免关税、取消壁垒、畅通贸易，发出有力信号，提振世界经济复苏士气。我们应该制定二十国集团行动计划，并就抗疫宏观政策协调及时作出必要的机制性沟通和安排。
I want to call on all G20 members to take collective actions - cutting tariffs, removing barriers, and facilitating the unfettered flow of trade. Together, we can send a strong signal and restore confidence for global economic recovery. The G20 needs to draw up an action plan and promptly set up communication mechanisms and institutional arrangements for anti-epidemic macro policy coordination.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
值此关键时刻，我们应该直面挑战、迅速行动。我坚信，只要我们同舟共济、守望相助，就一定能够彻底战胜疫情，迎来人类发展更加美好的明天！
Now is a crucial moment, a time for us to rise up to challenge and act with swiftness. I am convinced that through solidarity and mutual assistance, we will prevail over this outbreak and we all will embrace a brighter future for mankind!
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
5. 习近平在亚太经合组织第二十七次领导人非正式会议上的讲话
携手构建亚太命运共同体
Working Together for an Asia-Pacific Community with A Shared Future
——在亚太经合组织第二十七次领导人非正式会议上的发言
（2020年11月20日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the 27th APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting
Beijing, 20 November 2020
尊敬的穆希丁总理，
各位同事：
The Right Honorable Prime Minister Tan Sri Muhyiddin Yassin,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴通过视频连线方式同大家相聚，感谢穆希丁总理和马来西亚政府为筹备这次会议作出的努力。
It gives me great pleasure to join you via video link. I wish to thank Prime Minister Muhyiddin Yassin and the Malaysian government for hosting the meeting.
亚太经合组织成立以来的30多年，是世界格局加速演变、全球治理深刻重塑的30多年，也是亚太地区发生翻天覆地变化的30多年。
The past 30-plus years since the inception of APEC has seen rapid evolution of the international landscape and profound transformation of global governance. It has also witnessed a sea change in the Asia-Pacific region.
30多年来，亚太经合组织合作不断深化，取得长足进展：我们以茂物目标为指引，不断提升区域经济一体化水平。我们推动贸易投资自由化便利化和经济技术合作两个轮子一起转，努力实现优势互补和均衡发展。我们倡导开放的地区主义，探索出自主自愿、协商一致、灵活务实、循序渐进的“APEC方式”。这期间，亚太地区经受住了两次金融危机的考验，10多亿人摆脱贫困，成为世界经济增长中最强劲、最活跃的一个板块，为构建开放型世界经济、支持多边贸易体制、引领经济全球化发挥了积极作用。
Over the past three decades and more, APEC cooperation has kept deepening and made substantial progress on many fronts. Guided by the Bogor Goals, we have steadily enhanced regional economic integration. We have advanced trade and investment liberalization and facilitation in tandem with economic and technical cooperation, with a view to realizing mutual complementarity and balanced development of the “two wheels” of APEC cooperation. We have advocated open regionalism and developed an APEC approach of voluntarism, consensus-building, flexibility, pragmatism and incremental progress. Over the years, the Asia-Pacific has weathered two financial crises and lifted over one billion people out of poverty. It has become a leading and most dynamic powerhouse of the global economy, playing an active role in building an open world economy, upholding the multilateral trading system, and spearheading economic globalization.
当前，世界和亚太正在经历深刻变革，新冠肺炎疫情暴发加速了这一趋势。世界经济陷入低迷，经济全球化遭遇逆风，单边主义、保护主义抬头，公平和效率、增长和分配、技术和就业等矛盾更加突出，贫富差距仍普遍存在，全球治理体系面临新的挑战。亚太地区数十年来第一次出现经济整体负增长，保护人民健康、实现经济复苏任务艰巨。亚太合作未来的路怎么走，关乎地区发展，关乎人民福祉，关乎世界未来。
Three decades on, both the world and the Asia-Pacific are experiencing profound changes, a process further accelerated by COVID-19. The world economy is in the doldrums. Economic globalization is encountering headwinds. Unilateralism and protectionism are on the rise. Balancing equity and efficiency, growth and distribution, and technology and employment is getting more difficult. The wealth gap remains a common sight. The global governance system faces new challenges. For the first time in decades, the Asia-Pacific as a whole registered negative economic growth. Protecting people’s health and reviving the economy are two formidable tasks we have to take on. Where should Asia-Pacific cooperation be heading? The answer bears on the development of our region, the well-being of our people, and the future of the world at large.
今年，亚太经合组织的一项重要任务是开启2020年后的合作愿景，我们达成了共建亚太共同体的目标。我们应该以此为新起点，开启亚太合作新阶段，延续亚太地区强劲发展势头，迎接亚太地区共同繁荣未来，共同构建开放包容、创新增长、互联互通、合作共赢的亚太命运共同体。
One priority on this year’s APEC agenda is to unveil the post-2020 vision, a pathway toward our goal of building an Asia-Pacific community. This should be taken as a new starting point for us to begin another phase in Asia-Pacific cooperation, sustain the strong momentum of development in our region, and embrace a future of shared prosperity. Together, we can build an Asia-Pacific community with a shared future featuring openness and inclusiveness, innovation-driven growth, greater connectivity, and mutually beneficial cooperation.
第一，坚持开放包容。世界经济正如我们身边的太平洋，汇聚千流、连通四海，铸就了浩瀚宽广的胸怀，孕育了波涛澎湃的活力。在平等相待基础上开展合作，在相互尊重基础上化解分歧，是亚太经济发展繁荣的根本。一路走来，亚太经合组织致力于推动区域经济一体化，围绕落实茂物目标取得了长足进展，也在引领多边贸易体制演变上发挥了重要作用。但是，实现自由开放的贸易和投资绝非可以一蹴而就。亚太地区要继续领风气之先，坚决维护和平稳定，坚定捍卫多边主义，坚持构建开放型世界经济，毫不动摇支持以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，促进自由开放的贸易和投资，引导经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。我们要继续推进区域经济一体化，早日建成亚太自由贸易区。中方欢迎区域全面经济伙伴关系协定完成签署，也将积极考虑加入全面与进步跨太平洋伙伴关系协定。我们在推动自由开放贸易的同时，经济技术合作也不能放松。我们要继续落实亚太经合组织高质量增长战略和包容行动议程，照顾发展中成员关切，特别关注妇女等群体面临的特殊困难，支持中小微企业发展，促进包容和可持续增长。中方将举办包容性贸易和投资研讨会，就贸易和投资政策广泛惠及人民提出建议。我们愿同各方一道把有关建议落到实处。
First, we need to stay open and inclusive. The world economy is like the Pacific Ocean around us — It admits water from various rivers, and connects different parts of the world. As such, it has acquired a vast magnitude and enormous vitality. The approach of pursuing cooperation as equals and resolving differences with mutual respect is what essentially makes economic development and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific possible. Throughout the years, APEC has committed itself to deepening regional economic integration and made significant progress in implementing the Bogor Goals. It has also played an important role in steering the evolution of the multilateral trading system. Yet it must be noted that free and open trade and investment cannot be achieved overnight. It is important that the Asia-Pacific should remain the bellwether in safeguarding peace and stability, upholding multilateralism, and fostering an open world economy. We must stay as determined as ever to support the multilateral trading system with the World Trade Organization at its core, promote free and open trade and investment, and make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all. Continued efforts are needed to press ahead with regional economic integration for the early realization of a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP). China welcomes the signing of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), and will favorably consider joining the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP).As we continue to work on free and open trade, we should pay no less attention to economic and technical cooperation. We need to further implement the APEC Strategy for Strengthening Quality Growth and the Action Agenda on Advancing Inclusion, and accommodate the concerns of developing members. We need to address in particular the special needs of women and some other communities, and support micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs). Such efforts will contribute to inclusive and sustainable growth. China will host a seminar on advancing economic inclusion through trade and investment to look for suggestions on how trade and investment policies could deliver broader benefits to people. China looks forward to working with all parties to follow up on those suggestions.
第二，坚持创新增长。数字经济是全球未来的发展方向，创新是亚太经济腾飞的翅膀。我们应该主动把握时代机遇，充分发挥本地区人力资源广、技术底子好、市场潜力大的特点，打造竞争新优势，为各国人民过上更好日子开辟新可能。我们要全面落实亚太经合组织互联网和数字经济路线图，促进新技术传播和运用，加强数字基础设施建设，消除数字鸿沟。我们要完善经济治理，努力营造开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境。中方今年开展智慧城市案例研究，将推动制定智慧城市指导原则，为亚太创新城市发展提供样板。中方提出倡议，推动各方分享数字技术抗疫和恢复经济的经验，倡导优化数字营商环境，激发市场主体活力，释放数字经济潜力，为亚太经济复苏注入新动力。明年，中方还将举办数字减贫研讨会，发挥数字技术优势，助力亚太地区消除贫困事业。
Second, we need to pursue innovation-driven growth. The digital economy represents the future direction of global development, while innovation has fueled the economic takeoff of the Asia-Pacific. We need to proactively seize the opportunities of our times and fully harness our region’s abundant human resources, solid technological foundation, and enormous market potential to gain a new competitive edge and open up new possibilities for the betterment of our people’s lives. The APEC Internet and Digital Economy Roadmap should be implemented in full to spur the dissemination and application of new technologies, strengthen digital infrastructure, and close the digital divide. We need to improve economic governance and foster an open, fair, equitable and non-discriminatory environment for businesses. This year, China has conducted an APEC case study on smart cities, which we hope will contribute to the formulation of guidelines on smart cities and offer an example for innovative urban development across the region. China calls for experience sharing among APEC members on how to control COVID-19 and achieve economic recovery with digital technologies. China also calls for improving the doing-digital-business environment, energizing market players, and tapping the potential of the digital economy. Such efforts will bring fresh impetus to economic recovery in our region. Next year, China will host a workshop on digital technology-enabled poverty alleviation, in a bid to unleash the role of digital technologies in eradicating poverty in our region.
第三，坚持互联互通。互联互通是区域经济一体化的重要基础，也是实现全球联动发展的必要条件，其重要性在疫情背景下就显得更加突出。我们要继续推进落实亚太经合组织互联互通蓝图，畅通人员、货物、资金、数据安全有序流动，实现亚太地区无缝联接。中方已经同印尼、韩国、新加坡等成员开通了疫情期间人员流动“快捷通道”，将继续建设人员流动便利化网络。我们要推动国际防疫健康信息互认。中方愿同各方一起积极稳妥推进货物“绿色通道”建设，提高通关效率，打通堵点、连接断点，推动搭建国际产业链、供应链合作平台，维护全球和地区产业链、供应链安全畅通运转。我们要促进各方发展规划和互联互通倡议彼此对接，形成合力。中方愿同各方携手高质量共建“一带一路”，为亚太互联互通建设搭建更广阔平台，为亚太和世界经济注入更强劲动力。
Third, we need to enhance connectivity. Connectivity is a vital basis of regional economic integration and an essential underpinning for interconnected development of the world. The ongoing pandemic further highlights the importance of connectivity. We need to continue to implement the APEC Connectivity Blueprint to facilitate the smooth, safe and orderly flow of people, goods, capital and data and achieve a seamlessly connected Asia-Pacific. China has opened “fast tracks” with fellow APEC members like Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, and Singapore to facilitate the movement of people during the pandemic, and more will be done to complete a network of such arrangements. In this connection, it is important to promote the mutual recognition of the COVID-related health information of international travelers. China is ready to take active and well-thought-out steps with all other parties to set up “green lanes”, which will help make customs clearance more efficient, unclog bottlenecks, and reconnect disrupted links. We may also promote the creation of international cooperation platforms on industrial and supply chains to ensure the safe and smooth operation of industrial and supply chains in our region and beyond. We need to pursue greater complementarity among the development plans and connectivity initiatives of different parties to forge a bigger synergy. On China’s part, we hope to work with all partners in high-quality Belt and Road cooperation, which we believe will set up a bigger platform for connectivity in the Asia-Pacific and inject a stronger impetus into the economy of our region and the wider world.
第四，坚持合作共赢。亚太各成员发展高度互补，利益深度融合。亚太经济合作从来不是零和博弈、你输我赢的政治游戏，而是相互成就、互利共赢的发展平台。马来西亚有句谚语，“遇山一起爬，遇沟一起跨”。这正是亚太大家庭精神的精髓。疫情再度告诉我们，只有团结合作，才能战胜挑战。我们要深化互信、包容、合作、共赢的亚太伙伴关系，秉持共商共建共享理念，不断提升区域合作水平，做大亚太合作蛋糕，实现共同繁荣。我们要在协商一致基础上推进务实合作，妥善处理矛盾和分歧，维护亚太合作正确方向，让亚太经合组织行稳致远。
Fourth, we need to promote mutually beneficial cooperation. The Asia-Pacific economies have a high degree of mutual complementarity and enjoy deeply intertwined interests. Our economic cooperation has never been a zero-sum political game in which one gains at the expense of the other. Rather, our cooperation has provided us with a development platform to ensure what we each do can be mutually reinforcing and beneficial to all. There is a Malay proverb that goes, “bukit sama didaki, lurah sama dituruni”, which means to climb the hill together and go down the ravine together. It aptly captures the spirit of our Asia-Pacific family. COVID-19 serves as another reminder that only solidarity and cooperation can enable us to prevail over challenges. We need to deepen the Asia-Pacific partnership featuring mutual trust, inclusiveness and mutually beneficial cooperation and follow the approach of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. We need to keep raising the level and scope of our regional cooperation to achieve shared prosperity for the whole region. It is important that we advance practical cooperation on the basis of consensus, properly manage differences and disagreements, and keep Asia-Pacific cooperation in the right direction to ensure APEC’s sound development in the long run.
应对疫情是当前最紧迫的任务。我们要加强疫苗研发和交流，努力让疫苗成为全球公共产品，促进疫苗在发展中国家的可及性和可负担性。中方已经加入“新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”。中方支持亚太经合组织加强公共卫生、中小微企业等领域政策交流和能力建设，提出远程医疗倡议，让贫困和偏远地区人民得到及时、有效医治，助力抗疫合作和经济复苏。
At this very moment, fighting COVID-19 is the most pressing task for us all. We must step up research and development of vaccines and related exchanges, and work harder to make the vaccines a global public good to improve their accessibility and affordability in developing countries. For that purpose, China has joined the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility (COVAX). We support APEC in strengthening policy exchanges and capacity building in the areas of public health and MSMEs. China has made a telemedicine initiative to give people in poor and remote areas access to timely and quality medical services. We hope these efforts will contribute to anti-epidemic cooperation and economic recovery.
中方高度重视亚太经合组织作用，将继续支持亚太经合组织发展，始终不渝扎根亚太、建设亚太、造福亚太。
China highly values the role of APEC. We will continue to support the organization’s development, and with our root struck deep in the Asia-Pacific, we will continue to serve its development and prosperity.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
今年，中国人民经过艰苦卓绝努力，取得抗疫斗争重大战略成果。中国同各国携手合作、共克时艰，为全球抗疫贡献了智慧和力量。中方毫无保留同各方分享防控和救治经验，向其他国家和国际组织提供力所能及帮助，以实际行动推动构建人类卫生健康共同体。我们统筹疫情防控和经济社会发展，加强宏观政策应对力度，推动中国经济稳步前行、逐步向好、不断升级。今年，中国经济前三季度同比增长0.7%，全年实现正增长已成定局，特别是现行标准下农村贫困人口将实现全面脱贫。
This year, the Chinese people have exerted strenuous efforts to score a major strategic achievement in controlling COVID-19. Working with other countries in these trying times, China has contributed its wisdom and resources to the global fight against the coronavirus. It has shared with various parties full experience on containment and treatment and done its best to assist other countries and international organizations. All these are among the concrete actions we have taken toward building a global community of health for all. At the same time, we have coordinated COVID-19 control with economic and social development at home, and scaled up macro policy response so that the Chinese economy could stabilize, pick up, and steadily upgrade. In the first three quarters of this year, China’s GDP grew by 0.7 percent, on course to register positive growth for the whole year. It is also worth noting that by the end of this year, we will have lifted out of poverty all rural residents living below the current poverty line.
不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。中国将建设更高水平开放型经济新体制，创造更具吸引力的投资和营商环境。
The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. China will build a new system of open economy of higher standards and create a more attractive investment and business environment.
中国愿同亚太各方一道，共创共享亚太和平繁荣美好未来，向构建人类命运共同体目标不断迈进。
To conclude, China is ready to work with all other parties in the Asia-Pacific to build and share a brighter future of peace and prosperity for our region and get ever closer to the goal of a community with a shard future for mankind.
谢谢大家。
I thank you all.
1. 习近平在气候雄心峰会上的讲话
继往开来，开启全球应对气候变化新征程
Building on Past Achievements and Launching a New Journey for Global Climate Actions
——在气候雄心峰会上的讲话
（2020年12月12日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Climate Ambition Summit
12 December 2020
尊敬的古特雷斯秘书长先生，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴出席今天的气候雄心峰会。5年前，各国领导人以最大的政治决心和智慧推动达成应对气候变化《巴黎协定》。5年来，《巴黎协定》进入实施阶段，得到国际社会广泛支持和参与。当前，国际格局加速演变，新冠肺炎疫情触发对人与自然关系的深刻反思，全球气候治理的未来更受关注。在此，我提3点倡议。
It gives me great pleasure to join you in this Climate Ambition Summit. Five years ago, world leaders showed utmost political resolve and wisdom and adopted the Paris Agreement on climate change. Since then, the implementation of the Paris Agreement has received extensive international support and participation. At present, the international landscape is evolving more rapidly and COVID-19 is triggering deep reflections on the relationship between man and nature. The future of global climate governance is drawing greater attention. In this context, I wish to make three proposals:
第一，团结一心，开创合作共赢的气候治理新局面。在气候变化挑战面前，人类命运与共，单边主义没有出路。我们只有坚持多边主义，讲团结、促合作，才能互利共赢，福泽各国人民。中方欢迎各国支持《巴黎协定》、为应对气候变化作出更大贡献。
First, we need to close ranks and make new advances in climate governance that features cooperation and win-win. In meeting the climate challenge, no one can be aloof and unilateralism will get us nowhere. Only by upholding multilateralism, unity and cooperation can we deliver shared benefits and win-win for all nations. China welcomes all countries’ support for the Paris Agreement and their greater contribution to tackling climate change.
第二，提振雄心，形成各尽所能的气候治理新体系。各国应该遵循共同但有区别的责任原则，根据国情和能力，最大程度强化行动。同时，发达国家要切实加大向发展中国家提供资金、技术、能力建设支持。
Second, we need to raise ambition and foster a new architecture of climate governance where every party does its part. Following the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, all countries need to maximize actions in light of their respective national circumstances and capabilities. At the same time, developed countries need to scale up support for developing countries in financing, technology and capacity building.
第三，增强信心，坚持绿色复苏的气候治理新思路。绿水青山就是金山银山。要大力倡导绿色低碳的生产生活方式，从绿色发展中寻找发展的机遇和动力。
Third, we need to boost confidence and pursue a new approach to climate governance that highlights green recovery. Mountains and rivers green are mountains of silver and gold. It is important to encourage green, low-carbon ways of life and production, and seek development opportunities and impetus from green development.
中国为达成应对气候变化《巴黎协定》作出重要贡献，也是落实《巴黎协定》的积极践行者。今年9月，我宣布中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更加有力的政策和措施，力争2030年前二氧化碳排放达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和。
China has made important contributions to adopting the Paris Agreement and has made active efforts toward implementing it. I announced in September that China would scale up its nationally determined contributions and adopt more vigorous policies and measures. We aim to peak carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060.
在此，我愿进一步宣布：到2030年，中国单位国内生产总值二氧化碳排放将比2005年下降65%以上，非化石能源占一次能源消费比重将达到25%左右，森林蓄积量将比2005年增加60亿立方米，风电、太阳能发电总装机容量将达到12亿千瓦以上。
Today, I wish to announce some further commitments for 2030: China will lower its carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP by over 65 percent from the 2005 level, increase the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to around 25 percent, increase the forest stock volume by 6 billion cubic meters from the 2005 level, and bring its total installed capacity of wind and solar power to over 1.2 billion kilowatts.
中国历来重信守诺，将以新发展理念为引领，在推动高质量发展中促进经济社会发展全面绿色转型，脚踏实地落实上述目标，为全球应对气候变化作出更大贡献。
China always honors its commitments. Guided by our new development philosophy, we will promote greener economic and social development in all respects while pursuing high-quality development. We will take solid steps to implement the targets just announced, and contribute even more to tackling the global climate challenge.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
“天不言而四时行，地不语而百物生。”地球是人类共同的、唯一的家园。让我们继往开来、并肩前行，助力《巴黎协定》行稳致远，开启全球应对气候变化新征程！
As a Chinese poem reads, “Heaven does not speak and it alternates the four seasons; Earth does not speak and it nurtures all things.” Earth is our only and shared home. Let us build on past achievements, work together to make steady progress in implementing the Paris Agreement, and launch a new journey for global climate actions.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
11. 习近平在第75届联大一般性辩论上的讲话
（2020年9月22日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the General Debate of the 75th Session of
The United Nations General Assembly
Beijing, 22 September 2020
主席先生，
各位同事：
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
今年是世界反法西斯战争胜利75周年，也是联合国成立75周年。昨天，联合国隆重举行纪念峰会，铭记世界反法西斯战争历史经验和教训，重申对联合国宪章宗旨和原则的坚定承诺，具有重要意义。
This year marks the 75th anniversary of the victory in the World Anti-Fascist War and the founding of the United Nations (UN). Yesterday, the high-level meeting to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the UN was held. The meeting was a significant one, as it reaffirmed our abiding commitment to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter on the basis of reviewing the historical experience and lessons of the World Anti-Fascist War.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
人类正在同新冠肺炎疫情进行斗争。病毒肆虐全球，疫情不断反复。我们目睹了各国政府的努力、医务人员的付出、科学工作者的探索、普通民众的坚守。各国人民守望相助，展现出人类在重大灾难面前的勇气、决心、关爱，照亮了至暗时刻。疫情终将被人类战胜，胜利必将属于世界人民！
We humans are battling COVID-19, a virus that has ravaged the world and has kept resurging. In this fight, we have witnessed the efforts of governments, dedication of medical workers, exploration of scientists, and perseverance of the public. People of different countries have come together. With courage, resolve and compassion which lit the dark hour, we have confronted the disaster head on. The virus will be defeated. Humanity will win this battle!
——面对疫情，我们要践行人民至上、生命至上理念。要调集一切资源，科学防治，精准施策，不遗漏一个感染者，不放弃一位患者，坚决遏制疫情蔓延。
- Facing the virus, we should put people and life first. We should mobilize all resources to make a science-based and targeted response. No case should be missed and no patient should be left untreated. The spread of the virus must be contained.
——面对疫情，我们要加强团结、同舟共济。要秉持科学精神，充分发挥世界卫生组织关键领导作用，推进国际联防联控，坚决打赢全球疫情阻击战，反对政治化、污名化。
- Facing the virus, we should enhance solidarity and get this through together. We should follow the guidance of science, give full play to the leading role of the World Health Organization, and launch a joint international response to beat this pandemic. Any attempt of politicizing the issue or stigmatization must be rejected.
——面对疫情，我们要制定全面和常态化防控措施。要有序推进复商复市复工复学，创造就业，拉动经济，恢复经济社会秩序和活力，主要经济体要加强宏观政策协调，不仅要重启本国经济，而且要为世界经济复苏作出贡献。
- Facing the virus, we should adopt comprehensive and long-term control measures. We should reopen businesses and schools in an orderly way, so as to create jobs, boost the economy, and restore economic and social order and vitality. The major economies need to step up macro policy coordination. We should not only restart our own economies, but also contribute to global recovery.
——面对疫情，我们要关心和照顾发展中国家特别是非洲国家。国际社会要在减缓债务、援助等方面采取及时和强有力举措，确保落实好《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》，帮助他们克服困难。
- Facing the virus, we should show concern for and accommodate the need of developing countries, especially African countries. The international community needs to take timely and robust measures in such fields as debt relief and international assistance, ensure the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and help these countries overcome their difficulties.
75年前，中国为赢得世界反法西斯战争胜利作出了历史性贡献，支持建立了联合国。今天，秉持同样的担当精神，中国积极投身国际抗疫合作，为维护全球公共卫生安全贡献中国力量。我们将继续同各国分享抗疫经验和诊疗技术，向有需要的国家提供支持和帮助，确保全球抗疫物资供应链稳定，并积极参与病毒溯源和传播途径全球科学研究。中国已有多支疫苗进入Ⅲ期临床实验，研发完成并投入使用后将作为全球公共产品，优先向发展中国家提供。中国将落实好两年提供20亿美元国际援助的承诺，深化农业、减贫、教育、妇女儿童、气候变化等领域国际合作，助力各国经济社会恢复发展。
Seventy-five years ago, China made historic contributions to winning the World Anti-Fascist War and supported the founding of the United Nations. Today, with the same sense of responsibility, China is actively involved in the international fight against COVID-19, contributing its share to upholding global public health security. Going forward, we will continue to share our epidemic control practices as well as diagnostics and therapeutics with other countries, provide support and assistance to countries in need, ensure stable global anti-epidemic supply chains, and actively participate in the global research on tracing the source and transmission routes of the virus. At the moment, several COVID-19 vaccines developed by China are in Phase III clinical trials. When their development is completed and they are available for use, these vaccines will be made a global public good, and they will be provided to other developing countries on a priority basis. China will honor its commitment of providing US$2 billion of international assistance over two years, further international cooperation in such fields as agriculture, poverty reduction, education, women and children, and climate change, and support other countries in restoring economic and social development.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
人类社会发展史，就是一部不断战胜各种挑战和困难的历史。新冠肺炎疫情全球大流行和世界百年未有之大变局相互影响，但和平与发展的时代主题没有变，各国人民和平发展合作共赢的期待更加强烈。新冠肺炎疫情不会是人类面临的最后一次危机，我们必须做好携手迎接更多全球性挑战的准备。
The history of development of human society is a history of our struggles against all challenges and difficulties and our victories over them. At present, the world is battling the COVID-19 pandemic as it goes through profound changes never seen in a century. Yet, peace and development remain the underlying trend of the times, and people everywhere crave even more strongly for peace, development and win-win cooperation. COVID-19 will not be the last crisis to confront humanity, so we must join hands and be prepared to meet even more global challenges.
第一，这场疫情启示我们，我们生活在一个互联互通、休戚与共的地球村里。各国紧密相连，人类命运与共。任何国家都不能从别国的困难中谋取利益，从他国的动荡中收获稳定。如果以邻为壑、隔岸观火，别国的威胁迟早会变成自己的挑战。我们要树立你中有我、我中有你的命运共同体意识，跳出小圈子和零和博弈思维，树立大家庭和合作共赢理念，摒弃意识形态争论，跨越文明冲突陷阱，相互尊重各国自主选择的发展道路和模式，让世界多样性成为人类社会进步的不竭动力、人类文明多姿多彩的天然形态。
First, COVID-19 reminds us that we are living in an interconnected global village with a common stake. All countries are closely connected and we share a common future. No country can gain from others' difficulties or maintain stability by taking advantage of others' troubles. To pursue a beggar-thy-neighbor policy or just watch from a safe distance when others are in danger will eventually land one in the same trouble faced by others. This is why we should embrace the vision of a community with a shared future in which everyone is bound together. We should reject attempts to build blocs to keep others out and oppose a zero-sum approach. We should see each other as members of the same big family, pursue win-win cooperation, and rise above ideological disputes and do not fall into the trap of "clash of civilizations". More importantly, we should respect a country's independent choice of development path and model. The world is diverse in nature, and we should turn this diversity into a constant source of inspiration driving human advancement. This will ensure that human civilizations remain colorful and diversified.
第二，这场疫情启示我们，经济全球化是客观现实和历史潮流。面对经济全球化大势，像鸵鸟一样把头埋在沙里假装视而不见，或像堂吉诃德一样挥舞长矛加以抵制，都违背了历史规律。世界退不回彼此封闭孤立的状态，更不可能被人为割裂。我们不能回避经济全球化带来的挑战，必须直面贫富差距、发展鸿沟等重大问题。我们要处理好政府和市场、公平和效率、增长和分配、技术和就业的关系，使发展既平衡又充分，发展成果公平惠及不同国家不同阶层不同人群。我们要秉持开放包容理念，坚定不移构建开放型世界经济，维护以世界贸易组织为基石的多边贸易体制，旗帜鲜明反对单边主义、保护主义，维护全球产业链供应链稳定畅通。
Second, COVID-19 reminds us that economic globalization is an indisputable reality and a historical trend. Burying one's head in the sand like an ostrich in the face of economic globalization or trying to fight it with Don Quixote's lance goes against the trend of history. Let this be clear: The world will never return to isolation, and no one can sever the ties between countries. We should not dodge the challenges of economic globalization. Instead, we must face up to major issues such as the wealth gap and the development divide. We should strike a proper balance between the government and the market, fairness and efficiency, growth and income distribution, and technology and employment so as to ensure full and balanced development that delivers benefit to people from all countries, sectors and backgrounds in an equitable way. We should pursue open and inclusive development, remain committed to building an open world economy, and uphold the multilateral trading regime with the World Trade Organization as the cornerstone. We should say no to unilateralism and protectionism, and work to ensure the stable and smooth functioning of global industrial and supply chains.
第三，这场疫情启示我们，人类需要一场自我革命，加快形成绿色发展方式和生活方式，建设生态文明和美丽地球。人类不能再忽视大自然一次又一次的警告，沿着只讲索取不讲投入、只讲发展不讲保护、只讲利用不讲修复的老路走下去。应对气候变化《巴黎协定》代表了全球绿色低碳转型的大方向，是保护地球家园需要采取的最低限度行动，各国必须迈出决定性步伐。中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更加有力的政策和措施，二氧化碳排放力争于2030年前达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和。各国要树立创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念，抓住新一轮科技革命和产业变革的历史性机遇，推动疫情后世界经济“绿色复苏”，汇聚起可持续发展的强大合力。
Third, COVID-19 reminds us that humankind should launch a green revolution and move faster to create a green way of development and life, preserve the environment and make Mother Earth a better place for all. Humankind can no longer afford to ignore the repeated warnings of Nature and go down the beaten path of extracting resources without investing in conservation, pursuing development at the expense of protection, and exploiting resources without restoration. The Paris Agreement on climate change charts the course for the world to transition to green and low-carbon development. It outlines the minimum steps to be taken to protect the Earth, our shared homeland, and all countries must take decisive steps to honor this Agreement. China will scale up its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions by adopting more vigorous policies and measures. We aim to have CO2 emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060. We call on all countries to pursue innovative, coordinated, green and open development for all, seize the historic opportunities presented by the new round of scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation, achieve a green recovery of the world economy in the post-COVID era and thus create a powerful force driving sustainable development.
第四，这场疫情启示我们，全球治理体系亟待改革和完善。疫情不仅是对各国执政能力的大考，也是对全球治理体系的检验。我们要坚持走多边主义道路，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系。全球治理应该秉持共商共建共享原则，推动各国权利平等、机会平等、规则平等，使全球治理体系符合变化了的世界政治经济，满足应对全球性挑战的现实需要，顺应和平发展合作共赢的历史趋势。国家之间有分歧是正常的，应该通过对话协商妥善化解。国家之间可以有竞争，但必须是积极和良性的，要守住道德底线和国际规范。大国更应该有大的样子，要提供更多全球公共产品，承担大国责任，展现大国担当。
Fourth, COVID-19 reminds us that the global governance system calls for reform and improvement. COVID-19 is a major test of the governance capacity of countries; it is also a test of the global governance system. We should stay true to multilateralism and safeguard the international system with the UN at its core. Global governance should be based on the principle of extensive consultation, joint cooperation and shared benefits so as to ensure that all countries enjoy equal rights and opportunities and follow the same rules. The global governance system should adapt itself to evolving global political and economic dynamics, meet global challenges and embrace the underlying trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation. It is natural for countries to have differences. What's important is to address them through dialogue and consultation. Countries may engage in competition, but such competition should be positive and healthy in nature. When in competition, countries should not breach the moral standard and should comply with international norms. In particular, major countries should act like major countries. They should provide more global public goods, take up their due responsibilities and live up to people's expectations.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
今年以来，14亿中国人民不畏艰难、上下同心，全力克服疫情影响，加快恢复生产生活秩序。我们有信心如期全面建成小康社会，如期实现现行标准下农村贫困人口全部脱贫，提前10年实现《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》减贫目标。
Since the start of this year, we, the 1.4 billion Chinese, undaunted by the strike of COVID-19, and with the government and the people united as one, have made all-out efforts to control the virus and speedily restore life and economy to normalcy. We have every confidence to achieve our goals within the set time frame, that is, to finish the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, lift out of poverty all rural residents living below the current poverty line, and meet ten years ahead of schedule the poverty eradication target set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
中国是世界上最大的发展中国家，走的是和平发展、开放发展、合作发展、共同发展的道路。我们永远不称霸，不扩张，不谋求势力范围，无意跟任何国家打冷战热战，坚持以对话弥合分歧，以谈判化解争端。我们不追求一枝独秀，不搞你输我赢，也不会关起门来封闭运行，将逐步形成以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局，为中国经济发展开辟空间，为世界经济复苏和增长增添动力。
China is the largest developing country in the world, a country that is committed to peaceful, open, cooperative and common development. We will never seek hegemony, expansion, or sphere of influence. We have no intention to fight either a Cold War or a hot war with any country. We will continue to narrow differences and resolve disputes with others through dialogue and negotiation. We do not seek to develop only ourselves or engage in a zero-sum game. We will not pursue development behind closed doors. Rather, we aim to foster, over time, a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. This will create more space for China's economic development and add impetus to global economic recovery and growth.
中国将继续做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。为支持联合国在国际事务中发挥核心作用，我宣布：
China will continue to work as a builder of global peace, a contributor to global development and a defender of international order. To support the UN in playing its central role in international affairs, I hereby announce the following steps to be taken by China:
——中国将向联合国新冠肺炎疫情全球人道主义应对计划再提供5000万美元支持；
- China will provide another US$50 million to the UN COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan.
——中国将设立规模5000万美元的第三期中国－联合国粮农组织南南合作信托基金；
- China will provide US$50 million to the China-FAO South-South Cooperation Trust Fund (Phase III).
——中国－联合国和平与发展基金将在2025年到期后延期5年；
- China will extend the Peace and Development Trust Fund between the UN and China by five years after it expires in 2025.
——中国将设立联合国全球地理信息知识与创新中心和可持续发展大数据国际研究中心，为落实《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》提供新助力。
- China will set up a UN Global Geospatial Knowledge and Innovation Center and an International Research Center of Big Data for Sustainable Development Goals to facilitate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
主席先生、各位同事！
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
历史接力棒已经传到我们这一代人手中，我们必须作出无愧于人民、无愧于历史的抉择。让我们团结起来，坚守和平、发展、公平、正义、民主、自由的全人类共同价值，推动构建新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体，共同创造世界更加美好的未来！
The baton of history has been passed to our generation, and we must make the right choice, a choice worthy of the people's trust and of our times. Let us join hands to uphold the values of peace, development, equity, justice, democracy and freedom shared by all of us and build a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind. Together, we can make the world a better place for everyone.
12. 习近平在联合国成立75周年纪念峰会上的讲话
（2020年9月21日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the High-level Meeting to
Commemorate the 75th Anniversary of the United Nations
Beijing, 21 September 2020
主席先生，
各位同事：
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
75年前，世界人民经过浴血奋战，赢得世界反法西斯战争伟大胜利。这是正义的胜利、人民的胜利。
Seventy-five years ago, the people of the world, with strenuous struggle and tremendous sacrifice, won the great victory in the World Anti-Fascist War. It was indeed a victory for justice and a victory for the people.
在上个世纪前半叶人类两度身历惨不堪言的战祸之后，联合国应运而生。联合国风雨兼程，走过了75年不平凡历程。世界和平与发展掀开新篇章。
Through the first half of the last century, mankind had suffered the scourge of two devastating wars that brought untold sufferings to the world. It was against such a backdrop that the United Nations (UN) came into being. Over the ensuing 75 years, this Organization has traveled an extraordinary journey. A new chapter has thus opened for peace and development in the world.
——联合国的75年，是人类社会迅速发展的75年。我们经历了深刻广泛的科技发展和工业革命，正在迎来新一轮更大范围、更深层次的科技革命和产业变革，世界社会生产力得到极大解放和发展，人类战胜困难和改造世界的能力空前提高。
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has seen dramatic progress in human society. We have experienced significant and across-the-board progress in science and technology and in industrial revolution. We are now embracing a new round of even more extensive and substantial scientific and technological revolution and industrial transformation. Globally, social productivity has been unprecedentedly unleashed and boosted. Mankind has never been so powerfully capable to overcome the difficulties we face and change the world we live in.
——联合国的75年，是国际形势深刻变化的75年。广大发展中国家赢得民族解放和国家独立，10多亿人口摆脱贫困，几十亿人口迈上现代化征程，极大增强了世界和平与发展的力量，深刻改变了世界格局。
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has witnessed profound changes in the international situation. A great many developing countries have gained national liberation and independence. Over a billion people have walked out of poverty. And a population of several billion have embarked on a path toward modernization. These achievements have considerably strengthened the force for peace and development in the world and transformed the international landscape in a most far-reaching way.
——联合国的75年，是多边主义快速发展的75年。世界问题多得很、大得很，全球性挑战日益上升，应该也只能通过对话合作解决。国际上的事大家商量着办，同舟共济已经成为国际社会广泛共识。
— The 75 years since the founding of the UN has been a period of rapid development of multilateralism. Problems facing the world are big and many, and global challenges are on the increase. They should and can only be resolved through dialogue and cooperation. International affairs ought to be addressed through consultation among us all. The understanding that we are all in the same boat is now a popular consensus in the global community.
风雨过后是彩虹。经历一次又一次考验，联合国仍然充满生机，寄托着70多亿人民对美好生活的向往，联合国宪章仍然是世界和平与发展的重要保障。
After the storm comes the rainbow. The UN has stood one test after another and emerged with renewed vigor and vitality. The UN embodies the aspiration of the over seven billion people for a better life, and the UN Charter remains an important guarantee for world peace and development.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
当今世界正经历百年未有之大变局，突如其来的新冠肺炎疫情对全世界是一次严峻考验。人类已经进入互联互通的新时代，各国利益休戚相关、命运紧密相连。全球性威胁和挑战需要强有力的全球性应对。
Major changes unseen in a century are taking place in our world. The sudden attack of COVID-19 is a grave test for the entire world. Mankind has entered a new era of interconnectedness, with countries sharing intertwined interests and their future closely linked together. Global threats and global challenges require strong, global responses.
面对新形势新挑战，我们必须严肃思考：世界需要一个什么样的联合国？在后疫情时代，联合国应该如何发挥作用？我提几点建议。
In the face of new realities and challenges, we must do some serious thinking: What kind of UN is needed for the world? How should the Organization play its role in the post-COVID era? Let me share some of my thoughts with you.
第一，主持公道。大小国家相互尊重、一律平等是时代进步的要求，也是联合国宪章首要原则。任何国家都没有包揽国际事务、主宰他国命运、垄断发展优势的权力，更不能在世界上我行我素，搞霸权、霸凌、霸道。单边主义没有出路，要坚持共商共建共享，由各国共同维护普遍安全，共同分享发展成果，共同掌握世界命运。要切实提高发展中国家在联合国的代表性和发言权，使联合国更加平衡地反映大多数国家利益和意愿。
First, the UN must stand firm for justice. Mutual respect and equality among all countries, big or small, represents the progress of our times and is the foremost principle of the UN Charter. No country has the right to dominate global affairs, control the destiny of others, or keep advantages in development all to itself. Even less should one be allowed to do whatever it likes and be the hegemon, bully or boss of the world. Unilateralism is a dead end. All need to follow the approach of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. All need to come together to uphold universal security, share the fruits of development, and jointly decide on the future of the world. It is imperative that the representation and voice of developing countries be increased so that the UN could be more balanced in reflecting the interests and wishes of the majority of countries in the world.
第二，厉行法治。联合国宪章宗旨和原则是处理国际关系的根本遵循，也是国际秩序稳定的重要基石，必须毫不动摇加以维护。各国关系和利益只能以制度和规则加以协调，不能谁的拳头大就听谁的。大国更应该带头做国际法治的倡导者和维护者，遵信守诺，不搞例外主义，不搞双重标准，也不能歪曲国际法，以法治之名侵害他国正当权益、破坏国际和平稳定。
Second, the UN must uphold the rule of law. The purposes and principles of the UN Charter are the fundamental guidelines for handling international relations. They constitute a cornerstone of stable international order and must be unswervingly kept and upheld. Relations among countries and coordination of their interests must only be based on rules and institutions; they must not be lorded over by those who wave a strong fist at others. Big countries should lead by example in advocating and upholding the international rule of law and in honoring their commitments. There must be no practice of exceptionalism or double standards. Nor should international law be distorted and used as a pretext to undermine other countries’ legitimate rights and interests or world peace and stability.
第三，促进合作。促进国际合作是联合国成立的初衷，也是联合国宪章重要宗旨。靠冷战思维，以意识形态划线，搞零和游戏，既解决不了本国问题，更应对不了人类面临的共同挑战。我们要做的是，以对话代替冲突，以协商代替胁迫，以共赢代替零和，把本国利益同各国共同利益结合起来，努力扩大各国共同利益汇合点，建设和谐合作的国际大家庭。
Third, the UN must promote cooperation. To promote cooperation among countries is a founding mission of the UN and an important purpose spelt out in the UN Charter. Cold War mentality, ideological lines or zero-sum game are no solution to a country’s own problem, still less an answer to mankind’s common challenges. What we need to do is to replace conflict with dialogue, coercion with consultation and zero-sum with win-win. We need to pursue the common interests of all as we each work to safeguard our own interests. We need to expand the converging interests of all and build a big global family of harmony and cooperation.
第四，聚焦行动。践行多边主义，不能坐而论道，而要起而行之，不能只开药方，不见疗效。联合国要以解决问题为出发点，以可视成果为导向，平衡推进安全、发展、人权，特别是要以落实《2030年可持续发展议程》为契机，把应对公共卫生等非传统安全挑战作为联合国工作优先方向，把发展问题置于全球宏观框架突出位置，更加重视促进和保护生存权和发展权。
Fourth, the UN must focus on real action. To put into practice the principle of multilateralism, we must act, not just talk. There must be a cure, not just a therapy. The UN should aim at problem solving and move toward tangible outcomes as it advances security, development and human rights in parallel. In particular, as the UN advances its 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, priority should be given to addressing non-traditional security challenges such as public health; the issue of development should be highlighted in the global macro framework; and there should be a greater emphasis on the promotion and protection of the rights to subsistence and development.
中国是第一个在联合国宪章上签字的国家，是联合国创始会员国，也是安理会常任理事国中唯一一个发展中国家。我们将始终做多边主义的践行者，积极参与全球治理体系改革和建设，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，坚定维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序，坚定维护联合国在国际事务中的核心作用。
China was the first to sign on the Charter of the United Nations. It is a founding member of the UN and the only developing country that takes a permanent seat on the Security Council. China will continue to be a true follower of multilateralism. It will stay actively engaged in reforming and developing the global governance system. It will firmly uphold the UN-centered international system, firmly uphold the international order underpinned by international law, and firmly defend the UN’s central role in international affairs.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
世界正站在一个新的历史起点上。让我们重申对多边主义的坚定承诺，推动构建人类命运共同体，在联合国旗帜下实现更大团结和进步！
The world now stands at a new historical starting point. Let us renew our firm commitment to multilateralism, work to promote a community with a shared future for mankind, and rally behind the banner of the UN to pursue greater unity and progress.
谢谢。
Thank you.
10. 习近平在联合国生物多样性峰会上的讲话
在联合国生物多样性峰会上的讲话
（2020年9月30日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the United Nations Summit on Biodiversity
Beijing, 30 September 2020
主席先生，
各位同事：
Mr. President,
Colleagues,
在联合国成立75周年之际，在各国致力于抗击新冠肺炎疫情、推动经济高质量复苏这一特殊时刻，联合国举办生物多样性峰会，大家共同探讨保护生物多样性、促进可持续发展的重大课题，具有现实而深远的意义。
At the special moment as the United Nations marks the 75th anniversary of its founding and countries around the world strive to emerge from COVID-19 and promote high-quality economic recovery, the UN has convened this Summit on Biodiversity. It gives us an opportunity to discuss major issues of biodiversity protection and sustainable development and therefore has both practical and far-reaching significance.
中国将于明年在昆明举办《生物多样性公约》第十五次缔约方大会，同各方共商全球生物多样性治理新战略。
The 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (COP15) will be hosted by China next year in the city of Kunming. COP15 offers an opportunity for the parties to adopt new strategies for global biodiversity governance.
当前，全球物种灭绝速度不断加快，生物多样性丧失和生态系统退化对人类生存和发展构成重大风险。新冠肺炎疫情告诉我们，人与自然是命运共同体。我们要同心协力，抓紧行动，在发展中保护，在保护中发展，共建万物和谐的美丽家园。我建议：
At present, there exists an acceleration of the global extinction of species. The loss of biodiversity and the degradation of the ecosystem pose a major risk to human survival and development. COVID-19 reminds us of the interdependence between man and Nature. It falls to all of us to act together and urgently to advance protection and development in parallel, so that we can turn Earth into a beautiful homeland for all creatures to live in harmony. To that end, I would like to make the following proposals:
第一，坚持生态文明，增强建设美丽世界动力。生物多样性关系人类福祉，是人类赖以生存和发展的重要基础。工业文明创造了巨大物质财富，但也带来了生物多样性丧失和环境破坏的生态危机。生态兴则文明兴。我们要站在对人类文明负责的高度，尊重自然、顺应自然、保护自然，探索人与自然和谐共生之路，促进经济发展与生态保护协调统一，共建繁荣、清洁、美丽的世界。
First, we need to adhere to ecological civilization and increase the drive for building a beautiful world. Biodiversity affects the well-being of humanity and provides the very basis for the human race to survive and thrive. The industrial civilization, while creating vast material wealth, has caused ecological crises as manifested in biodiversity loss and environmental damage. A sound ecosystem is essential for the prosperity of civilization. We need to take up our lofty responsibility for the entire human civilization, and we need to respect Nature, follow its laws and protect it. We need to find a way for man and Nature to live in harmony, balance and coordinate economic development and ecological protection, and work together to build a prosperous, clean and beautiful world.
第二，坚持多边主义，凝聚全球环境治理合力。联合国成立以来，国际社会积极推进全球环境治理。《生物多样性公约》、《联合国气候变化框架公约》及其《巴黎协定》等国际条约是相关环境治理的法律基础，也是多边合作的重要成果，得到各方广泛支持和参与。面对全球环境风险挑战，各国是同舟共济的命运共同体，单边主义不得人心，携手合作方为正道。我们要坚定捍卫以联合国为核心的国际体系，维护国际规则尊严和权威，提升全球环境治理水平。
Second, we need to uphold multilateralism and build synergy for global governance on the environment. Since the founding of the UN, the international community has made active efforts toward global environmental governance. International instruments such as the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement form the legal foundation for environmental governance in their respective fields. They represent important accomplishments of multilateral cooperation and enjoy broad support and participation from the international community. Faced with the risks and challenges to the environment worldwide, countries share a common stake as passengers in the same boat and form a community with a shared future. Unilateralism finds no support; cooperation is the right way forward. We must firmly safeguard the UN-centered international system and uphold the sanctity and authority of international rules so as to enhance global governance on the environment.
第三，保持绿色发展，培育疫后经济高质量复苏活力。新冠肺炎疫情对全球经济社会发展造成全面冲击，我们要着眼长远，保持定力，坚持绿色、包容、可持续发展。联合国发布的《2030年可持续发展议程》为各国发展指明了方向，生物多样性既是可持续发展基础，也是目标和手段。我们要以自然之道，养万物之生，从保护自然中寻找发展机遇，实现生态环境保护和经济高质量发展双赢。
Third, we need to continue with green development and increase the potential for high-quality economic recovery after COVID-19. Globally, the coronavirus has wreaked havoc on every aspect of economic and social development. We need to have our eyes on the long run, have determination and stay the course for green, inclusive and sustainable development. The UN's 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development points the way forward, and recognizes biodiversity as an important basis, a goal and the means for achieving sustainable development. Recognizing that "our solutions are in Nature", we could strive to find development opportunities while preserving Nature, and achieve win-win in both ecological conservation and high-quality development.
第四，增强责任心，提升应对环境挑战行动力。发达国家和发展中国家处于不同发展阶段，在环境问题上的历史责任和现实能力存在差异。我们要坚持共同但有区别的责任原则，坚持公平公正惠益分享，照顾发展中国家资金、技术、能力建设方面的关切。我们要切实践行承诺，抓好目标落实，有效扭转生物多样性丧失，共同守护地球家园。
Fourth, we need to heighten our sense of responsibility and strengthen the power of action to tackle challenges to the environment. Being at varying stages of development, developed and developing countries have different historical responsibilities and practical capabilities for addressing environmental issues. We need to uphold the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, ensure fair and equitable sharing of benefits, and accommodate developing countries' concerns over funding, technology and capacity building. We need to earnestly fulfill our commitments, focus on our targets, and effectively reverse biodiversity loss so as to protect the planet we call home.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
“生态文明：共建地球生命共同体”既是明年昆明大会的主题，也是人类对未来的美好寄语。作为昆明大会主席国，中方愿同各方分享生物多样性治理和生态文明建设经验。
"Ecological Civilization: Building a Shared Future for All Life on Earth", which is the theme of next year's Biodiversity Conference in Kunming, embodies humanity's hope for a better future. As the host country of COP15, China is happy to share with all parties its experience of advancing biodiversity governance and ecological progress.
——中国用生态文明理念指导发展。从道法自然、天人合一的中国传统智慧，到创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的新发展理念，中国把生态文明建设放在突出地位，融入中国经济社会发展各方面和全过程，努力建设人与自然和谐共生的现代化。
— China has pursued development under the vision of building an ecological civilization. From the traditional Chinese wisdom that the laws of Nature govern all things and that man must seek harmony with Nature, to the new development philosophy emphasizing innovative, coordinated, green and open development for all, China has always prioritized ecological progress and embedded it in every dimension and phase of its economic and social development. The goal is to seek a kind of modernization that promotes harmonious coexistence of man and Nature.
——中国采取有力政策行动。中国坚持山水林田湖草生命共同体，协同推进生物多样性治理。加快国家生物多样性保护立法步伐，划定生态保护红线，建立国家公园体系，实施生物多样性保护重大工程，提高社会参与和公众意识。过去10年，森林资源增长面积超过7000万公顷，居全球首位。长时间、大规模治理沙化、荒漠化，有效保护修复湿地，生物遗传资源收集保藏量位居世界前列。90%的陆地生态系统类型和85%的重点野生动物种群得到有效保护。
— China has rolled out strong policies and actions. China adopts a holistic approach to conserving the mountains, rivers, forests, farmlands, lakes and grasslands, and makes coordinated efforts to advance biodiversity governance. We have stepped up national legislation for preserving biodiversity, and are drawing red lines for protecting the ecosystems. We have effected a national parks system, carried out major biodiversity conservation projects, and increased social participation and public awareness. For the last 10 years, China has topped the world in forest resource increase, with more than 70 million hectares of land afforested. We have made long-term, large-scale efforts to combat sandification and desertification, and we have effectively protected and restored the wetlands. We now have one of the world's largest banks of genetic resources reserve. Ninety percent of terrestrial ecosystem types and 85 percent of key wild animal populations are under effective protection.
——中国积极参与全球环境治理。中国切实履行气候变化、生物多样性等环境相关条约义务，已提前完成2020年应对气候变化和设立自然保护区相关目标。作为世界上最大发展中国家，我们也愿承担与中国发展水平相称的国际责任，为全球环境治理贡献力量。中国将秉持人类命运共同体理念，继续作出艰苦卓绝努力，提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更加有力的政策和措施，二氧化碳排放力争于2030年前达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和，为实现应对气候变化《巴黎协定》确定的目标作出更大努力和贡献。
— China has taken an active part in global environmental governance. China takes seriously its obligations under environment-related treaties, including on climate change and biodiversity. We have hit, ahead of schedule, the targets set for 2020 for tackling climate change and establishing protected areas. As the largest developing country, China is prepared to take on international responsibilities commensurate with its level of development, and contribute its part to global environmental governance. Guided by the vision of building a community with a shared future for mankind, China will continue to make extraordinary efforts to scale up its nationally determined contributions. China will adopt even more forceful policies and measures and strive to peak carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060, thus making greater efforts and contributions toward meeting the objectives of the Paris Agreement.
主席先生！
Mr. President,
“山积而高，泽积而长。”加强生物多样性保护、推进全球环境治理需要各方持续坚韧努力。我欢迎大家明年聚首美丽的春城昆明，共商全球生物多样性保护大计，期待各方达成全面平衡、有力度、可执行的行动框架。让我们从这次峰会携手出发，同心协力，共建万物和谐的美丽世界！
As the saying goes, "Little by little, grains of soil pile up to make a mountain and drops of water converge to form a river." To enhance biodiversity conservation and global environmental governance require sustained efforts by all parties. I want to welcome you to Kunming, the beautiful "Spring City", next year, to discuss and draw up plans together for protecting global biodiversity, and I look forward to the adoption of a comprehensive, balanced, ambitious and implementable framework of action. Now, let us proceed from this Summit and work in concert to build a beautiful world of harmony among all beings on the planet.
7. 习近平在金砖国家领导人第十二次会晤上的讲话
守望相助共克疫情　携手同心推进合作
Fighting COVID-19 in Solidarity and
Advancing BRICS Cooperation Through Concerted Efforts
——在金砖国家领导人第十二次会晤上的讲话
（2020年11月17日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the 12th BRICS Summit
Beijing, 17 November 2020
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的博索纳罗总统：
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa,
Your Excellency President Jair Bolsonaro,
首先，感谢普京总统和俄罗斯政府为这次金砖国家领导人会晤所做精心安排。当前，世纪疫情和百年变局交织，国际格局深刻演变。在这样一个重要时刻，我们举行这次会晤，共商抗疫合作大计，共绘金砖发展蓝图，具有特殊重要意义。
I wish to begin by thanking President Putin and the Russian government for their thoughtful organization of this BRICS Summit. Right now, the world is caught between a pandemic of the century and momentous changes never seen in the last one hundred years. The international landscape keeps evolving in profound ways. At such a critical moment, we are meeting to discuss our joint response to COVID-19 and draw a blueprint for the future of BRICS. The meeting has thus taken on a special significance.
环顾全球，疫情使各国人民生命安全和身体健康遭受巨大威胁，全球公共卫生体系面临严峻考验，人类社会正在经历百年来最严重的传染病大流行。国际贸易和投资急剧萎缩，人员、货物流动严重受阻，不稳定不确定因素层出不穷，世界经济正在经历上世纪30年代大萧条以来最严重的衰退。单边主义、保护主义、霸凌行径愈演愈烈，治理赤字、信任赤字、发展赤字、和平赤字有增无减。
Around the world, COVID-19 is posing a grave threat to people’s life and well-being. The global public health system is facing a severe test. Human society is going through the most serious pandemic in the past century. International trade and investment have shrunk considerably. The flow of goods and personnel has been impeded. Factors for uncertainty and instability are numerous. The world economy is witnessing the worst recession since the Great Depression in the 1930s. Unilateralism, protectionism and acts of bullying are becoming rampant, and the deficit in governance, trust, development and peace is widening instead of narrowing.
同时，我们坚信，和平与发展的时代主题没有改变，世界多极化和经济全球化的时代潮流也不可能逆转。我们要为人民福祉着想，秉持人类命运共同体理念，用实际行动为建设美好世界作出应有贡献。
Despite all this, we remain convinced that the theme of our times, peace and development, has not changed, and that the trend toward multipolarity and economic globalization cannot be turned around. We must keep people’s welfare close to heart and pursue the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind. Through concrete actions, we will contribute our share to making the world a better place for everyone.
——我们要坚持多边主义，维护世界和平稳定。历史昭示我们，恪守多边主义，追求公平正义，战乱冲突可以避免；搞单边主义、强权政治，纷争对抗将愈演愈烈。如果无视规则和法治，继续大搞单边霸凌、“退群毁约”，不仅违背世界人民普遍愿望，也是对各国正当权利和尊严的践踏。
First, we need to uphold multilateralism, and safeguard peace and stability in our world. History teaches us that multilateralism, equity and justice can keep war and conflict at bay, while unilateralism and power politics will inflate dispute and confrontation. Flouting rules and laws, treading the path of unilateralism and bullying, and withdrawing from international organizations and agreements run counter to the will of the general public and trample on the legitimate rights and dignity of all nations.
面对多边和单边、公道和霸道之争，金砖国家要坚定维护国际公平正义，高举多边主义旗帜，捍卫联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序。各国应该超越意识形态，尊重彼此根据自身国情选择的社会制度、经济模式、发展道路。要倡导共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，通过协商和谈判化解分歧，反对干涉内政，反对单边制裁和“长臂管辖”，共同营造和平稳定的发展环境。
Facing the choice between multilateralism and unilateralism, and between justice and hegemony, we BRICS countries must stand up for equity and justice in the world. We must hold high the banner of multilateralism, and defend the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We must endeavor to safeguard the UN-centered international system and the international order underpinned by international law. It is important that countries rise above ideology and respect each other’s choices of social system, economic model and development path consistent with their national conditions. We need to champion the concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We need to work through consultation and negotiation to address differences. We need to oppose interference in others’ internal affairs, as well as unilateral sanctions and long-arm jurisdiction. With concerted efforts, we will foster a peaceful and stable environment for development.
——我们要坚持团结协作，合力克服疫情挑战。当前，病毒仍在全球肆虐，疫情还在不断反复，夺取全球抗疫胜利仍需付出艰苦努力。经过近一年的抗疫斗争，许多国家在疫情防控方面积累了宝贵经验，在药物和疫苗研发上取得了显著进展。近一年的抗疫实践证明，只要团结一心、科学防治，病毒传播可以控制，疫情影响能够克服。
Second, we need to enhance solidarity and coordination, and come together to meet the COVID-19 challenge. The coronavirus is still causing havoc in many places and waves of infection are resurging. Securing a worldwide victory against the pandemic remains an uphill journey. Nearly one year into the battle, many countries have gained important experience on COVID-19 containment and made encouraging progress in drugs and vaccine research and development (R&D). Our fight over the past year proves that as long as we stand in unity and follow science, we can control the spread of the virus and offset its impact.
我们要坚持人民至上、生命至上，调集一切资源、尽一切努力保护人民生命安全和身体健康。要加强国际联防联控，分享疫情信息，交流抗疫经验，遏制病毒传播。要支持世界卫生组织发挥关键领导作用。中国企业正在同俄罗斯、巴西伙伴合作开展疫苗三期临床试验，我们也愿同南非、印度开展有关合作。中方已经加入“新冠肺炎疫苗实施计划”，将在这个平台上同各国特别是其他发展中国家分享疫苗。我们愿积极考虑向有需要的金砖国家提供疫苗。为推动金砖国家疫苗研发中心建设，中方已经设立疫苗研发中国中心，愿通过线上线下相结合方式，推进五国疫苗联合研发和试验、合作建厂、授权生产、标准互认等工作。我倡议五国召开传统医药研讨会，探索传统医药在新冠肺炎防治方面的作用，为全球疫情防控增添有力武器。
What is important is that we put people’s life and health first, mobilize all resources and do everything we can to protect people’s safety and well-being. It is important to step up international coordination and response, and share information and epidemic control experience to stop the virus in its tracks. It is important that we support WHO’s crucial leadership role in this endeavor. As we speak, Chinese companies are working with their Russian and Brazilian partners on phase-III clinical trials of vaccines, and we are prepared to have cooperation with South Africa and India as well. China has joined the COVAX facility, a platform on which we will share vaccines with other countries, developing countries in particular. We will actively consider providing vaccines to BRICS countries where there is a need. To support the development of the BRICS Vaccine R&D Center, China has designated its own national center. We will work with other BRICS countries both online and offline to advance collective vaccine research and trials, set up plants, authorize production and recognize each other’s standards. I propose that we convene a BRICS symposium on traditional medicine to explore its role in coronavirus prevention and treatment. This may well boost the global arsenal against COVID-19.
事实证明，将疫情政治化、污名化，搞“甩锅”、推责，干扰的是全球合作抗疫大局。我们要推动以团结取代分歧，以理性消除偏见，扫除“政治病毒”，凝聚起各国携手抗疫的最大合力。
What has happened shows that acts of politicization, stigmatization, blame-shifting and scapegoating only serve to disrupt overall global cooperation against the virus. We need to overcome division with unity, replace bias with reason and stamp out the “political virus”. In this way, we will pool the maximum global synergy to beat the virus.
——我们要坚持开放创新，促进世界经济复苏。根据国际货币基金组织预测，今年世界经济将萎缩4.4%，新兴市场国家和发展中国家将经历60年来首次负增长。一手防疫情，一手稳经济，是各国刻不容缓的任务。我们要在确保安全前提下，积极推进经济复苏，在疫情防控常态化中实现经济社会活动有序开展。要加强宏观经济政策协调，推动落实“人员与货物跨境流动便利化倡议”，保障产业链、供应链安全畅通，助力各国复工复产、恢复经济。
Third, we need to pursue openness and innovation, and promote global economic recovery. The IMF predicts that the world economy will shrink by 4.4 percent this year, and that emerging markets and developing countries will experience negative growth for the first time in 60 years. To stabilize the economy while controlling the pandemic is the pressing task facing all countries. Under the precondition that safety is ensured, we must actively pursue economic recovery and seek to carry out economic and social activities in an orderly way as we fight the virus on an ongoing basis. We need to strengthen macroeconomic policy coordination, follow through on the initiative on facilitating cross-border flow of people and goods, and keep industrial and supply chains safe and open to better enable the resumption of business activities and economic recovery.
利用疫情搞“去全球化”，鼓吹所谓“经济脱钩”、“平行体系”，最终只会损害本国和各国共同利益。当前形势下，我们要坚定不移构建开放型世界经济，维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，反对滥用国家安全之名行保护主义之实。要利用好疫情催生的新业态新模式，加强科技创新合作，营造开放、公平、公正、非歧视的营商环境，共同实现更高质量、更具韧性的发展。
The practice of using the pandemic to pursue “de-globalization” or clamor for “economic decoupling” and “parallel systems” will end up hurting one’s own interests and the common interests of all. Under the current situation, we need to stand firm for building an open world economy. We need to uphold the multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core and reject abuse of the “national security” concept for protectionist purposes. We need to leverage the new business forms and models triggered by the pandemic, strengthen cooperation on scientific and technological innovation, and nurture an open, fair, equitable and nondiscriminatory business environment to bring about common development of higher quality and stronger resilience.
中方愿同各方一道加快建设金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系。我们将在福建省厦门市建立金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系创新基地，开展政策协调、人才培养、项目开发等领域合作，欢迎金砖国家积极参与。近期，中方发起了《全球数据安全倡议》，推动共建和平、安全、开放、合作、有序的网络空间，促进数字经济健康发展，希望得到金砖国家支持。
China will work with other parties to flesh out the BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution at a faster pace. We will open in Xiamen, Fujian Province a BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution innovation center to advance cooperation on policy coordination, personnel training and project development, and we welcome the active participation of fellow BRICS countries. Not long ago, China launched a Global Initiative on Data Security, which aims to jointly foster a peaceful, secure, open, cooperative and orderly cyberspace to enable sound growth of the digital economy. We look forward to support from our fellow BRICS countries.
——我们要坚持民生优先，推进全球可持续发展。发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。无论是消除疫情影响、重回生活正轨，还是平息冲突动乱、解决人道主义危机，根本上都要靠以人民为中心的发展。世界银行预测，2020年全球人均收入将下降3.6%，8800万至1.15亿人将因疫情陷入极端贫困。
Fourth, we need to prioritize people’s livelihood, and promote sustainable global development. Development holds the master key to all problems. All our efforts, from clearing the impact of COVID-19 and getting back to a normal life, to ending conflicts and humanitarian crises, ultimately depend on people-centered development. According to World Bank forecast, global per capita income might drop 3.6 percent this year, and some 88 million to 115 million people might be pushed into extreme poverty due to the pandemic.
我们要直面疫情挑战，推动国际社会将落实《联合国2030年可持续发展议程》置于国际发展合作核心，将消除贫困作为首要目标，让资源更多向减贫、教育、卫生、基础设施建设等领域倾斜。要支持联合国发挥统筹协调作用，推动构建更加平等均衡的全球发展伙伴关系，让发展成果更多惠及发展中国家，更好满足弱势群体需求。
COVID-19 is a challenge we have to face head-on. We need to call on the international community to place the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the heart of international development cooperation. Poverty eradication must be made a primary goal, and more resources must be channeled to poverty reduction, education, health and infrastructure development. We need to support the UN’s coordinating role and foster global development partnerships that are more equal and balanced, so that the fruits of development will spread to more developing countries and the needs of underprivileged groups will be better addressed.
——我们要坚持绿色低碳，促进人与自然和谐共生。全球变暖不会因疫情停下脚步，应对气候变化一刻也不能松懈。我们要落实好应对气候变化《巴黎协定》，恪守共同但有区别的责任原则，为发展中国家特别是小岛屿国家提供更多帮助。中国愿承担与自身发展水平相称的国际责任，继续为应对气候变化付出艰苦努力。我不久前在联合国宣布，中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更有力的政策和举措，二氧化碳排放力争于2030年前达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和。我们将说到做到！
Fifth, we need to pursue green and low-carbon development, and strive for harmony between man and nature. Global warming will not stop due to COVID-19. To tackle climate change, we must never relax our efforts. We need to implement the Paris Agreement in good faith, stick to the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, and provide more help to developing countries, particularly the small island developing states. China is prepared to take on international responsibilities befitting its level of development, and will continue to make extraordinary efforts to address climate change. Recently, I announced at the UN China’s initiative to scale up its nationally determined contributions and adopt more forceful policies and measures to strive to peak carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. You can count on China to keep its promise.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
不久前，中共十九届五中全会审议通过了关于制定第十四个五年规划的建议，提出全面建成小康社会奋斗目标将如期实现，明年中国将开启全面建设社会主义现代化国家新征程，我们将科学把握新发展阶段，坚定贯彻新发展理念，积极构建以国内大循环为主体、国内国际双循环相互促进的新发展格局。我们将下大气力扩大内需，全面深化改革，推动科技创新，为国内经济发展增添动力。中国开放的大门不会关闭，只会越开越大。我们将更加积极地融入全球市场，更加主动地深化对外合作，为世界经济复苏发展创造更多机遇和空间。
The recently concluded Fifth Plenary Session of the 19th CPC Central Committee adopted recommendations for formulating China’s 14th five-year plan. The plenum underscored that China will finish building a moderately prosperous society in all respects within the set time frame, and will embark on a new journey next year toward fully building a modern socialist country. Based on a scientific analysis of the new stage of China’s development, we will stay committed to the new development philosophy, and actively foster a new development paradigm with domestic circulation as the mainstay and domestic and international circulations reinforcing each other. We will redouble efforts to expand domestic demand, deepen reform across the board and promote innovation in science and technology to add impetus to China’s economic growth. China will not shut its door of opening-up; it will embrace the world with more open arms. China will be more vigorous in integrating with the global market and will take greater initiative in deepening international cooperation. In so doing, China will create more opportunities and space for global recovery and growth.
我们都在同一艘船上。风高浪急之时，我们更要把准方向，掌握好节奏，团结合作，乘风破浪，行稳致远，驶向更加美好的明天。
All of us are indeed passengers in the same boat. When the wind is strong and the tides are high, we must be even more focused on our direction. We must keep pace and work as a team to break the waves and navigate steadily toward a brighter future.
谢谢。
Thank you.
110. 习近平主席在联合国教科文组织第九届青年论坛开幕式上的贺词
亲爱的青年朋友们：	
Dear Young Friends,
值此第九届青年论坛开幕暨联合国教科文组织成立70周年之际，我谨代表中国政府和人民，并以我个人的名义，对论坛的举行表示热烈的祝贺！	
On the occasion of the opening of the ninth UNESCO Youth Forum and the 70th anniversary of the founding of UNESCO, I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, warm congratulations to the opening of the forum!
本届论坛以“推动可持续发展，塑造全球公民”为主题，对促进可持续发展、开展文明对话具有重要意义。前不久，联合国可持续发展峰会通过了2030年可持续发展议程。落实好这项议程确定的目标，建立一个公平、包容、可持续的地球，是包括全球青年在内的每个人都要重视和担当的责任。	
Themed on Young Global Citizens for a Sustainable Planet, this forum is highly relevant to promoting sustainable development and dialogue among civilizations. Not long ago, the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Meeting the targets set by the agenda and building a fair, inclusive and sustainable world is the responsibility that all of us, including young people across the world, need to come forward to undertake.
青年最富有朝气，最富有梦想，是未来的领导者和建设者。中国重视、关怀、信任青年，支持青年发展自身、贡献社会、造福人民，在实现中国梦的历史进程中放飞青春梦想。
Filled with vigor and full of dreams, young people are the leaders and creators of the future. China values, cares about and plays trust in the young people. We support them as they aspire to pursue personal development, contribute to the community and serve the larger population. They will have every opportunity to make their dreams come true in the historical process of realizing the Chinese dream.
世界的未来属于年轻一代。全球青年有理想、有担当，人类就有希望，推进人类和平与发展的崇高事业就有源源不断的强大力量。希望各国青年用欣赏、互鉴、共享的观点看待世界，推动不同文明交流互鉴、和谐共生，积极为构建人类命运共同体添砖献瓦。	
The future of the world is in the hands of the younger generation. When young people around the world pursue their ideals and fulfill their responsibilities, mankind will have a more promising future, and there will be an inexhaustible source of strength to support the lofty cause of peace and development. I hope that young people of all countries could see the world with appreciation and in a spirit of sharing and mutual learning, promote exchanges and harmony among different cultures, and contribute to the building of a community of shared future of mankind.
预祝本届青年论坛圆满成功！	
I wish the forum a complete success!
55. 习近平在上海合作组织青岛峰会欢迎宴会上的祝酒辞
尊敬的各位同事，各位来宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们：大家晚上好！
Distinguished colleagues, dear guests, ladies and gentlemen, friends, good evening!
很高兴同各位相聚在黄海之滨的山东青岛。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对来华出席上海合作组织成员国元首理事会会议的各国领导人和国际组织负责人，对各位来宾，表示热烈的欢迎！
It is such a pleasure to have you with us here in Qingdao, Shandong province, on the shore of the Yellow Sea. I wish to extend, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, a very warm welcome to all of you, particularly the leaders and heads of international organizations who have come to attend the meeting of the Council of Heads of Member States of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO).
山东是孔子的故乡和儒家文化发祥地。儒家思想是中华文明的重要组成部分。儒家倡导“大道之行，天下为公”，主张“协和万邦，和衷共济，四海一家”。这种“和合”理念同“上海精神”有很多相通之处。“上海精神”坚持互信、互利、平等、协商、尊重多样文明、谋求共同发展，强调求同存异、合作共赢，在国际上获得广泛认同和支持。
Shandong is the home province of Confucius and birthplace of Confucianism. An integral part of Chinese civilization, Confucianism believes that “a just cause should be pursued for the common good” and champions harmony, unity and a shared community for all nations. Its emphasis on unity and harmony has much in common with the Shanghai Spirit, namely, mutual trust, mutual benefit, equality, consultation, respect for diversity of civilizations and pursuit of common development. The Shanghai Spirit’s focus on seeking common ground while setting aside differences and pursuing mutually beneficial cooperation has won widespread international endorsement and support.
在“上海精神”引领下，本组织不仅在安全、经济、人文等合作领域取得丰硕成果，在机制建设方面也迈出历史性步伐。如今，上海合作组织拥有8个成员国、4个观察员国、6个对话伙伴，是维护地区安全、促进共同发展、完善全球治理的重要力量。
Guided by the Shanghai Spirit, our organization has delivered fruitful outcomes in security, economic and cultural cooperation and made historic strides in institution-building. Today, with eight member states, four observer states and six dialogue partners, the SCO has become an important force for upholding regional security, promoting common development and improving global governance.
青岛是世界著名的“帆船之都”，许多船只从这里扬帆起航、追逐梦想。明天，我们将在这里举行上海合作组织扩员后的首次峰会，全面规划本组织未来发展蓝图。
Qingdao is a famous international sailing capital. It is from here that many ships set sail in pursuit of dreams. Tomorrow, we will hold the first summit of the SCO after its expansion and draw up a blueprint for its future growth.
让我们以青岛峰会为新的起点，高扬“上海精神”的风帆，齐心协力，乘风破浪，共同开启上海合作组织发展新征程！
The Qingdao Summit is a new departure point for us. Together, let us hoist the sail of the Shanghai Spirit, break waves and embark on a new voyage for our organization.
现在，我提议，大家共同举杯，为青岛峰会圆满成功，为各国发展繁荣、人民幸福安康，为上海合作组织的美好明天，为各位来宾和家人的健康，干杯！
Now please join me in a toast, to the success of the Qingdao Summit, to the prosperity of our countries and the happiness of our people, to a brighter future of the SCO, and to the health of all of you and your families. Cheers!
