1. 习近平在气候雄心峰会上的讲话
继往开来，开启全球应对气候变化新征程
Building on Past Achievements and Launching a New Journey for Global Climate Actions
——在气候雄心峰会上的讲话
（2020年12月12日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Statement by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Climate Ambition Summit
12 December 2020
尊敬的古特雷斯秘书长先生，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency Secretary-General António Guterres,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴出席今天的气候雄心峰会。5年前，各国领导人以最大的政治决心和智慧推动达成应对气候变化《巴黎协定》。5年来，《巴黎协定》进入实施阶段，得到国际社会广泛支持和参与。当前，国际格局加速演变，新冠肺炎疫情触发对人与自然关系的深刻反思，全球气候治理的未来更受关注。在此，我提3点倡议。
It gives me great pleasure to join you in this Climate Ambition Summit. Five years ago, world leaders showed utmost political resolve and wisdom and adopted the Paris Agreement on climate change. Since then, the implementation of the Paris Agreement has received extensive international support and participation. At present, the international landscape is evolving more rapidly and COVID-19 is triggering deep reflections on the relationship between man and nature. The future of global climate governance is drawing greater attention. In this context, I wish to make three proposals:
第一，团结一心，开创合作共赢的气候治理新局面。在气候变化挑战面前，人类命运与共，单边主义没有出路。我们只有坚持多边主义，讲团结、促合作，才能互利共赢，福泽各国人民。中方欢迎各国支持《巴黎协定》、为应对气候变化作出更大贡献。
First, we need to close ranks and make new advances in climate governance that features cooperation and win-win. In meeting the climate challenge, no one can be aloof and unilateralism will get us nowhere. Only by upholding multilateralism, unity and cooperation can we deliver shared benefits and win-win for all nations. China welcomes all countries’ support for the Paris Agreement and their greater contribution to tackling climate change.
第二，提振雄心，形成各尽所能的气候治理新体系。各国应该遵循共同但有区别的责任原则，根据国情和能力，最大程度强化行动。同时，发达国家要切实加大向发展中国家提供资金、技术、能力建设支持。
Second, we need to raise ambition and foster a new architecture of climate governance where every party does its part. Following the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities, all countries need to maximize actions in light of their respective national circumstances and capabilities. At the same time, developed countries need to scale up support for developing countries in financing, technology and capacity building.
第三，增强信心，坚持绿色复苏的气候治理新思路。绿水青山就是金山银山。要大力倡导绿色低碳的生产生活方式，从绿色发展中寻找发展的机遇和动力。
Third, we need to boost confidence and pursue a new approach to climate governance that highlights green recovery. Mountains and rivers green are mountains of silver and gold. It is important to encourage green, low-carbon ways of life and production, and seek development opportunities and impetus from green development.
中国为达成应对气候变化《巴黎协定》作出重要贡献，也是落实《巴黎协定》的积极践行者。今年9月，我宣布中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，采取更加有力的政策和措施，力争2030年前二氧化碳排放达到峰值，努力争取2060年前实现碳中和。
China has made important contributions to adopting the Paris Agreement and has made active efforts toward implementing it. I announced in September that China would scale up its nationally determined contributions and adopt more vigorous policies and measures. We aim to peak carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060.
在此，我愿进一步宣布：到2030年，中国单位国内生产总值二氧化碳排放将比2005年下降65%以上，非化石能源占一次能源消费比重将达到25%左右，森林蓄积量将比2005年增加60亿立方米，风电、太阳能发电总装机容量将达到12亿千瓦以上。
Today, I wish to announce some further commitments for 2030: China will lower its carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP by over 65 percent from the 2005 level, increase the share of non-fossil fuels in primary energy consumption to around 25 percent, increase the forest stock volume by 6 billion cubic meters from the 2005 level, and bring its total installed capacity of wind and solar power to over 1.2 billion kilowatts.
中国历来重信守诺，将以新发展理念为引领，在推动高质量发展中促进经济社会发展全面绿色转型，脚踏实地落实上述目标，为全球应对气候变化作出更大贡献。
China always honors its commitments. Guided by our new development philosophy, we will promote greener economic and social development in all respects while pursuing high-quality development. We will take solid steps to implement the targets just announced, and contribute even more to tackling the global climate challenge.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
“天不言而四时行，地不语而百物生。”地球是人类共同的、唯一的家园。让我们继往开来、并肩前行，助力《巴黎协定》行稳致远，开启全球应对气候变化新征程！
As a Chinese poem reads, “Heaven does not speak and it alternates the four seasons; Earth does not speak and it nurtures all things.” Earth is our only and shared home. Let us build on past achievements, work together to make steady progress in implementing the Paris Agreement, and launch a new journey for global climate actions.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.