102. 习近平在二十国集团领导人峰会工作午宴上的发言
在二十国集团领导人峰会工作午宴上关于中国主办2016年峰会的发言
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年11月16日，安塔利亚）
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
On the 2016 G20 Summit in China
At the Working Lunch of the G20 Summit
Antalya, 16 November 2015
各位同事：	Colleagues,
首先，我要祝贺埃尔多安总统，这次安塔利亚峰会取得圆满成功，对外释放了二十国集团为世界经济谋动力、为各国人民谋福祉的积极信号。	
Let me begin by congratulating President Erdogan on the full success of the Antalya Summit. It has sent an encouraging signal of the G20 working together to boost the global economy and improve people's well-being all over the world.
中国将于明年9月4日至5日在浙江省杭州市举行二十国集团领导人第十一次峰会。借此机会，我要感谢各国和国际组织对中方的支持。期待各位同事届时出席杭州峰会。	
China will host the 11th G20 Summit from September 4th to 5th next year in Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province. I wish to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to countries and international organizations for their support. I look forward to welcoming you to the Hangzhou Summit.
中国有句俗语，上有天堂，下有苏杭。意思是说，杭州和苏州风景如画，堪称人间天堂。杭州是历史文化名城，也是创新活力之城，相信2016年峰会将给大家呈现一种历史和现实交汇的独特韵味。	
There is a Chinese saying, "Up in heaven, there is paradise; down on earth, there are Suzhou and Hangzhou." It means that the cities of Hangzhou and Suzhou have beautiful sceneries that make them comparable to paradise on earth. Hangzhou is not only a renowned city of history and culture, but also a leader in innovation. I trust that the 2016 Summit will present to us a unique setting where history meets modernity.
在前期同各方沟通中，中方深深感受到大家对明年峰会的期待。基于当前形势和各方期待，中方把2016年峰会的主题确定为“构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济”，希望从4个重点领域推进明年峰会筹备工作。一是创新增长方式，重在推进改革创新，开辟和抓住新机遇，提升世界经济增长潜力。二是完善全球经济金融治理，增强新兴市场国家和发展中国家的代表性和发言权，提高世界经济抗风险能力。三是促进国际贸易和投资，发挥其对增长的推动作用，构建开放型世界经济。四是推动包容、联动式发展，力求落实2030年可持续发展议程，消除贫困，实现共同发展。	
Through our previous conversations with various G20 members, we have got a keen sense of people's expectations for next year's Summit. Based on an assessment of the current situation and the expectations of all parties, we have formulated the theme of the 2016 Summit as "Towards an Innovative, Invigorated, Interconnected and Inclusive World Economy". We hope to take forward the preparatory work for the Summit in the following four key areas. First, we need to transform growth patterns in innovative ways with particular focus on pursuing reform and innovation. We must create and seize new opportunities to raise the potential of global economic growth. Second, we need to improve global economic and financial governance, increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries, and enhance the capacity of the global economy to ward off risks. Third, we need to promote global trade and investment to generate growth and build an open world economy. Fourth, we need to promote inclusive and interconnected development, strive to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, eliminate poverty, and achieve common development.
我们提出上述主题和重点，主要出于3方面考虑。	
Our proposal on the above theme and key areas is based on the following three observations.
（一）世界经济基本走出危机，但复苏高度脆弱，增长动力不足，主要经济体走势和政策更趋分化。我们迫切需要找到新的增长源，推动世界经济走向新一轮繁荣。	
First, although the global economy is no longer mired in crisis, the recovery remains weak and fragile for lack of growth engines. And the performances and policies of major economies continue to diverge. We are in an urgent need of new sources of growth to take the global economy to a new round of prosperity.
（二）近年来，全球经济治理改革进展不畅，国际经济贸易规则加速演变。今年联合国发展峰会、世界贸易组织第十届部长会、气候变化巴黎大会相继举行，对国际发展合作、多边贸易体制、应对气候变化全球行动作出新的规划。我们需要采取协调一致行动，引领国际经济合作发展方向。	
Second, reform of the global economic governance in recent years has hit a rough patch and international economic and trade rules have been fast evolving. The UN Sustainable Development Summit, the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference and the Paris Climate Conference are all on this year's global agenda, where new plans are being made for international development cooperation, the multilateral trading regime and the global campaign against climate change. We need to make coordinated and concerted efforts to guide international economic cooperation.
（三）二十国集团面临从危机应对向长效治理机制的转变，议题从短期问题向深层次和长期性问题延伸。二十国集团成员协调宏观经济政策和加强合作的必要性和难度同步增加。我们需要发扬伙伴关系精神，促使二十国集团顺利完成转变，巩固作为全球经济治理主要平台的地位。	
Third, G20 is now facing a transformation from a mechanism of crisis response to one of long-term governance. As its agenda items shift from short-term issues to deep-seated and longer-term ones, the necessity for and difficulty of macroeconomic policy coordination and enhanced cooperation among G20 members have both increased. We need to act in the spirit of partnership to work for the smooth transformation of G20 and the consolidation of its role as the premier forum for global economic governance.
各位同事！	
Colleagues,
二十国集团是每个成员的二十国集团。在杭州峰会筹备过程中，中方将始终保持开放、透明、包容姿态，同各成员加强沟通和协调，共同把二十国集团维护好、建设好、发展好。
G20 belongs to each and every one of its members. In preparing for the Hangzhou Summit, China will consistently follow an open, transparent and inclusive approach, and strengthen communication and coordination with all other members to jointly uphold, strengthen and develop G20.
明年9月，我将在西湖之畔欢迎各位。	
I look forward to seeing you at the shore of the West Lake in Hangzhou next September.
谢谢大家！	
Thank you.