106. 习近平在联合国维和峰会上的讲话
中国为和平而来
——在联合国维和峰会上的讲话
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
（2015年9月28日，纽约）
China Is Here for Peace
-- Speech at the UN Peacekeeping Summit
Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
New York, September 28, 2015
尊敬的奥巴马总统，
尊敬的潘基文秘书长，
各位同事：	Your Excellency President Obama,
Your Excellency Secretary General Ban Ki-moon,
Dear Colleagues,
我赞赏奥巴马总统倡议召开这次维和峰会。	
I appreciate President Obama's initiative in convening this peacekeeping summit.
和平是人类共同愿望和崇高目标。联合国维和行动为和平而生，为和平而存，成为维护世界和平与安全的重要途径。维和行动给冲突地区带去信心，让当地民众看到希望。	
Peace is the common aspiration and lofty goal shared by all mankind. It was for the purpose of securing peace that the UN peacekeeping operations came into being. Now as an important means of upholding world peace and security, these peacekeeping operations bring confidence to areas beset by conflict and hope to the local people who are its victims.
当前，在世界很多地方，冲突地区民众依然饱受战乱之苦，对和平的渴望更加强烈，对联合国的期待更加殷切，对维和行动的期盼更加凸显。中国主张：	
As we speak, people in many conflict-ridden places around the world are still suffering. They have a deep yearning for peace, higher hopes for the United Nations, and greater expectations for its peacekeeping operations. The following is what China stands for:
—— 恪守维和基本原则。联合国宪章和哈马舍尔德原则是维和行动的根本指南，应该继续坚持。联合国安理会决议应该得到完整执行，任何国家不能越权行事。维和行动要根据当地形势和人民意愿，及时制定并落实撤出战略。	
-- The basic principles of peacekeeping should be strictly followed. The Charter of the United Nations and the Hammarskjold principles -- the fundamental guidelines for peacekeeping operations -- should continue to be respected. Security Council resolutions should be implemented in their entirety, allowing no country to act beyond their mandate. Peacekeeping missions should be carried out according to local situation and the will of the local people. Exit strategies need to be formulated and executed in a timely manner.
—— 完善维和行动体系。维和行动既要同预防外交、建设和平纵向衔接，也要同政治斡旋、推进法治、民族和解、民生改善等横向配合。联合国安理会要更多听取当事国和出兵国意见。联合国应该同相关地区组织建立更协调的维和伙伴关系。
-- The peacekeeping system needs to be improved. Peacekeeping operations should be aligned in sequence with preventive diplomacy and peace-building, and at the same time coordinate with political mediation, rule of law, national reconciliation, and improvement of living standards. The UN Security Council should be more attentive to the opinions of those parties directly involved, and the views of those countries which are contributing troops. A better coordinated peacekeeping partnership should be established between the United Nations and relevant regional organizations.
—— 提高快速反应水平。维和行动快速部署，能为和平争取机会，为生命赢得时间。中国欢迎联合国实施新的“维和能力待命机制”，呼吁会员国积极加入。	
-- Rapid response needs to be enhanced. Fast deployment of peacekeeping operations can bring better prospects of peace and win more time to save lives. China welcomes the United Nations' establishment of a new Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, and calls on member states to join the system.
—— 加大对非洲的帮扶。维和行动的主要需求在非洲。从长远计，国际社会和联合国要支持非洲国家提高自身维和维稳能力，以非洲方式解决非洲问题。	
-- Greater support and help should be given to Africa. Africa has the greatest need for peacekeeping. In the long run, the international community and the United Nations should support African countries in increasing their own capacity to maintain peace and stability, so that African issues can be addressed in ways that are adapted to African needs.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
中国作为联合国安理会常任理事国，参加维和行动已经25年了，成为维和行动主要出兵国和出资国。为支持改进和加强联合国维和行动，我宣布：	
As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China has taken part in peacekeeping operations for 25 years. We are a principal contributor of troops and funds to these operations. To support the improvement and strengthening of UN peacekeeping operations, I hereby announce that:
第一，中国将加入新的联合国维和能力待命机制，决定为此率先组建常备成建制维和警队，并建设8000人规模的维和待命部队。	
First, China will join the new UN Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System and has thus decided to take the lead in setting up a permanent peacekeeping police squad and build a peacekeeping standby force of 8,000 troops.
第二，中国将积极考虑应联合国要求，派更多工程、运输、医疗人员参与维和行动。	
Second, China will give favorable consideration to UN requests for more Chinese engineering troops and transport and medical staff to take part in UN peacekeeping operations.
第三，今后5年，中国将为各国培训2000名维和人员，开展10个扫雷援助项目，包括提供培训和器材。	
Third, in the coming five years, China will train 2,000 peacekeepers from other countries, and carry out 10 mine clearance assistance programs which will include the provision of training and equipment.
第四，今后5年，中国将向非盟提供总额为1亿美元的无偿军事援助，以支持非洲常备军和危机应对快速反应部队建设。	
Fourth, in the coming five years, China will provide free military aid of US$100 million to the African Union to support the building of the African Standby Force and the African Capacity for Immediate Response to Crisis.
第五，中国将向联合国在非洲的维和行动部署首支直升机分队。	
Fifth, China will send its first peacekeeping helicopter squad to UN peacekeeping operations in Africa.
第六，中国-联合国和平与发展基金的部分资金将用于支持联合国维和行动。	
Sixth, part of the China-UN peace and development fund will be used to support UN peacekeeping operations.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
在联合国维和行动中，已有18位中国军人和警察牺牲。5年前，中国维和女警察和志虹在海地执行联合国维和任务时不幸殉职，留下年仅4岁的幼子和年逾花甲的父母。她曾经写道：“于大千世界，我也许只是一根羽毛，但我也要以羽毛的方式，承载和平的心愿。”
Eighteen Chinese men and women in uniform have laid down their lives in UN peacekeeping operations. Five years ago, we lost He Zhihong, a peacekeeping policewoman in the UN peacekeeping mission in Haiti. She left a four-year-old son and elderly parents. She once wrote: "In this vast world, I may be just like a small feather. But even so, I want this feather to carry the wish for peace."
这是她生前的愿望，也是中国对和平的承诺。	
This was her wish, and it is also China's commitment to peace.
谢谢！	
Thank you.