136. 习近平发表2014年新年贺词
新年前夕，国家主席习近平通过中国国际广播电台、中央人民广播电台、中央电视台，发表了二〇一四年新年贺词。全文如下：	
Chinese President Xi Jinping has delivered a New Year address to domestic and overseas audience via China Radio International, China National Radio and China Central Television. Here's the entire speech.
我们即将迎来充满希望的2014年。一元复始，万象更新。在这里，我向全国各族人民，向香港特别行政区同胞和澳门特别行政区同胞，向台湾同胞和海外侨胞，向世界各国和各地区的朋友们，致以新年的祝福！祝福老人们健康！祝福孩子们快乐！祝福每个家庭幸福安康！	
We'll soon usher in the year 2014 with great hopes. As the new year begins, let us also start anew. I'm delighted to extend New Year wishes to Chinese people of all ethnic groups, to compatriots in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the Macao Special Administrative Region and Taiwan, to overseas Chinese and to friends all over the world! I wish senior people and children, and every family happiness, peace and health in the New Year.
在这辞旧迎新之际，无数工人、农民、知识分子、干部仍然坚守在工作岗位，不少同胞依然奔波在世界各地为祖国辛勤工作，许多人民解放军和武警官兵、公安干警正在履行光荣使命。他们有的远离祖国、远离亲人，有的不能同家人团聚。我代表祖国和人民，向他们致以诚挚的问候，祝他们平安顺利！	
At a time to ring out the old year and ring in the new, countless workers, farmers, intellectuals and officials still remain at their posts working hard. Many of our compatriots are on the go, working in various regions of the world for the motherland. Many members of the People's Liberation Army, armed police and public security are performing their glorious duties. Some of them are far away from the motherland, and their close relatives and some cannot have a reunion with family members. On behalf of the motherland and people, I'd like to offer my sincere greetings to them and wish them a peaceful and smooth new year.
2013年，对我们国家和人民来说是很不平凡的一年。我们共同战胜了各种困难和挑战，取得了新的显著成就。成绩来之不易，凝聚了大家的心血和汗水。我向大家表示衷心的感谢！	
The year 2013 has been an extraordinary year for our nation and people. We have worked together in overcoming a variety of obstacles and challenges, and made new outstanding achievements. The achievements have not come easily as they are the result of blood and sweat from all. I'd like to convey my heartfelt gratitude to you all.
2013年，我们对全面深化改革作出总体部署，共同描绘了未来发展的宏伟蓝图。2014年，我们将在改革的道路上迈出新的步伐。	
In 2013, we made an overall plan on comprehensively deepening reform and laid out a grand blueprint together for future development. In 2014, we are expected to make new strides on the road of reform.
我们推进改革的根本目的，是要让国家变得更加富强、让社会变得更加公平正义、让人民生活得更加美好。改革是需要我们共同为之奋斗的伟大事业，需要付出艰辛的努力。一分耕耘，一分收获。在改革开放的伟大实践中，我们已经创造了无数辉煌。我坚信，中国人民必将创造出新的辉煌。	
We have advanced reforms with the fundamental purpose of making our nation stronger and more prosperous. We also aim to achieve a higher degree of impartiality and justice in society so that people can live a better life. Reform is a great cause that calls for common commitments and strenuous efforts from us all. We must sow before we can reap. In the great practice of reform and opening up, we have already made countless spectacular achievements. I firmly believe that the Chinese people will create new spectacles.
宇宙浩瀚，星汉灿烂。70多亿人共同生活在我们这个星球上，应该守望相助、同舟共济、共同发展。中国人民追寻实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦，也祝愿各国人民能够实现自己的梦想。我真诚希望，世界各国人民在实现各自梦想的过程中相互理解、相互帮助，努力把我们赖以生存的地球建设成为共同的美好家园。	
There exists an immense and vast universe with bright stars. More than 7 billion people inhabit the planet Earth. We in the same boat should keep watch and help each other to achieve common development. We Chinese people seek to realize the Chinese dream, a great revitalization of the Chinese nation, and also wish that the dreams of people of all countries will come true. I sincerely hope that people of various countries in the world will understand and help each other in the course of realizing their dreams and build the Earth that we rely on for survival into a common beautiful homeland.
生活总是充满希望的，成功总是属于积极进取、不懈追求的人们。我们在前进的道路上，还会遇到各种风险和挑战。让老百姓过上更加幸福的生活，还有大量工作要做。我们要谦虚谨慎、艰苦奋斗，共同谱写伟大祖国发展的时代新篇章。	Life is always full of hopes. Success always belongs to those who keep forging ahead unswervingly. On our way forward, we will encounter various risks and challenges. We still need to complete a lot of tasks so that common people can live a happier life. We need to be modest and prudent and work hard together in writing a new chapter for the development of our great nation.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you all.