20. 习近平在金砖国家领导人巴西利亚会晤公开会议上的讲话
携手努力共谱合作新篇章
Together for a New Chapter in BRICS Cooperation
——在金砖国家领导人巴西利亚会晤公开会议上的讲话
（2019年11月14日，巴西利亚）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Brasilia Summit
Brasilia, 14 November 2019 
尊敬的博索纳罗总统，
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理，
尊敬的拉马福萨总统：
Your Excellency President Jair Bolsonaro,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa,
很高兴同大家相聚在巴西利亚，首先我要感谢博索纳罗总统盛情邀请和热情周到安排。
It gives me great pleasure to join you in this meeting in Brasilia. Let me first thank President Bolsonaro for the kind invitation and gracious hospitality.
这是我10年来第三次到访巴西。再次踏上这片充满活力的热土，巴西广袤的土地、丰富的资源、热情的人民、巨大的潜力使我印象深刻。
This is my third visit to Brazil in ten years. Stepping once again on this land of vibrancy, I am deeply impressed by its vastness and natural endowment, by the friendly people, and by the great promise the country holds.
这次会晤是在世界经济发展和国际格局演变的关键时刻举行的。环顾全球，新科技革命和产业变革方兴未艾，为各国实现跨越式发展提供更多机遇。新兴市场国家和发展中国家的崛起势头不可逆转，为全球经济治理体系变革注入强劲动力。令人担忧的是，保护主义、单边主义愈演愈烈，治理赤字、发展赤字、信任赤字有增无减，世界经济中不稳定不确定因素明显上升。
We are meeting at a time when crucial developments are taking place in the world economy and international landscape. A burgeoning round of technological revolution and industrial transformation has created more opportunities for countries across the globe to achieve leapfrog development. Meanwhile, the unstoppable rise of emerging markets and developing countries has injected strong impetus to the reform of the global economic governance system. Nevertheless, there are also causes for concern: rising protectionism and unilateralism; greater deficit of governance, development and trust; and growing uncertainties and destabilizing factors in the world economy.
面对百年未有之大变局，作为重要的新兴市场国家和发展中国家，我们应该顺应时代潮流，回应人民呼声，展现应有的责任担当，在追求发展道路上矢志不移，在团结合作历程中携手奋进，为人民谋幸福，为世界谋发展。
Faced with profound changes rarely seen in a century, major emerging markets and developing countries like us must grasp the trend of the times. We must respond to the call of our people, and shoulder our responsibilities. We must remain true to our unwavering commitment to development and strengthen solidarity and cooperation for the well-being of our people and for the development of our world.
——营造和平稳定的安全环境。当今世界并不太平，地区安全局势持续紧张，热点问题层出不穷，传统和非传统安全威胁相互交织，全球性挑战更加突出。
-- Let us work to foster a security environment of peace and stability. Our world has yet to achieve full peace. As we speak, tensions continue in regional security situations; hotspot issues keep emerging; traditional and non-traditional security threats are interwoven. Challenges of a global nature are becoming more prominent.
我们应该以维护世界和平、促进共同发展为目标，以维护公平正义、推动互利共赢为宗旨，以国际法和公认的国际关系基本准则为基础，倡导并践行多边主义。要维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，反对霸权主义和强权政治，建设性参与地缘政治热点问题解决进程。要通过金砖国家外长会晤、安全事务高级代表会议以及反恐工作组、网络安全工作组、常驻多边机构代表定期磋商等机制，密切战略沟通和协作，发出金砖共同声音，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。
We need to take it as our aim to safeguard peace and development for all; we need to uphold fairness and justice and promote win-win results; we need to base our efforts on international law and widely recognized norms of international relations; we need to champion and put into practice multilateralism. It is important that we uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and the UN-centered international system, oppose hegemonism and power politics, and take a constructive part in settling geopolitical flash points. We can use BRICS mechanisms, including the meetings of our ministers of foreign affairs/international relations and high representatives for security issues, the working groups on counter-terrorism and cybersecurity, and the regular meetings among our permanent representatives to multilateral institutions, to maintain close strategic communication and coordination and speak in one voice for a more just and equitable international order.
——谋求开放创新的发展前景。发展才是硬道理。当今时代的许多问题，追根溯源都是发展不平衡不充分造成的。我们应该把握改革创新的时代机遇，深入推进金砖国家新工业革命伙伴关系，在贸易和投资、数字经济、互联互通等领域不断打造合作成果，助力五国经济发展，努力实现高质量发展。
-- Let us pursue greater development prospects through openness and innovation. Development is what really matters to all. Many of the world's problems are rooted in unbalanced and inadequate development. We must therefore seize the opportunities that come with reform and innovation. We need to deepen the BRICS Partnership on New Industrial Revolution, and strive for more productive cooperation in such fields as trade and investment, digital economy, and connectivity. These efforts will surely lend impetus to economic growth and high-quality development in our five countries.
当前，经济全球化遭遇挫折，一定程度反映出现行全球治理体系的缺陷。金砖国家应该发挥负责任大国作用，积极倡导共商共建共享的全球治理观，推动全球经济治理体系变革。要坚决反对保护主义，维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制，提升新兴市场国家和发展中国家在国际事务中的发言权和影响力。要推动将发展问题置于全球宏观政策框架核心位置，坚定落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程和应对气候变化《巴黎协定》，实现经济、社会、环境各领域协同发展。
At present, economic globalization is encountering setbacks, which reveal, to a certain degree, the flaws existing in the global governance system. We the BRICS countries need to play our role as responsible major countries. We need to advocate extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits in global governance, and push for reform of the global economic governance system. We need to stand firm against protectionism, uphold the WTO-centered multilateral trading system, and increase the voice and influence of emerging markets and developing countries in international affairs. We need to prioritize development in the global macro policy framework, follow through the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on climate change, and promote coordinated progress in the economic, social and environmental spheres.
——促进互学互鉴的人文交流。人类社会发展史是一部多元文明共生并进的历史。不同国家、地区、民族，不同历史、宗教、习俗，彼此交相辉映、相因相生，共同擘画出这个精彩纷呈的世界。
-- Let us promote mutual learning through people-to-people exchanges. Human history is one of civilizations living and prospering together in diversity. Countries, regions and ethnic groups with varied histories, religions and customs have offered inspirations to each other and together contributed to a diverse and colorful world.
金砖国家为世界文明交流提供了最佳实践。近年来，五国人文交流如火如荼，电影节、运动会、合拍电影和纪录片等老百姓喜闻乐见的活动逐渐铺开，正在五国间架起一座坚实的民心之桥。我们应该保持势头，再接再厉，不断拓展人文交流广度和深度。在这个基础上，我们要以“金砖+”合作为平台，加强同不同文明、不同国家的交流对话，让金砖的朋友圈越来越大，伙伴网越来越广。
We the BRICS countries have many best practices to offer when it comes to cultural interactions. Over recent years, we have carried out flourishing cultural exchanges. Film festivals, sports games as well as film and documentary co-production have rolled in to the delight of our people, thus creating a bridge for our people to be brought still closer together. We need to sustain and build up this momentum to take our people-to-people exchanges to greater breadth and depth. On that basis, we can leverage "BRICS Plus" cooperation as a platform to increase dialogue with other countries and civilizations and win BRICS more friends and partners.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
今年是中华人民共和国成立70周年。70年来，在中国共产党领导下，中国人民自力更生、艰苦奋斗，在实践中开辟出中国特色社会主义道路，踏上了中华民族伟大复兴的时代征程。
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China. Over the past seven decades, working under the leadership of the Communist Party of China, the resilient and assiduous Chinese people have blazed a trail of socialism with Chinese characteristics and embarked on an epic journey toward national rejuvenation.
中国将坚持扩大对外开放，增加商品和服务进口，扩大外资市场准入，加强知识产权保护，形成全方位、多层次、宽领域的全面开放新格局。
Going forward, China will open up still wider. We will import more goods and services, ease market access for foreign investments, and step up intellectual property protection. With these efforts, we will break new ground in pursuing all-dimensional, multi-tiered and all-sectoral opening-up in China.
中国将遵循共商共建共享原则，秉持开放绿色廉洁理念，追求高质量、惠民生、可持续目标，与各国一道，推进高质量共建“一带一路”。
China will continue to act in the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, and pursue open, green, and clean cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative. We will continue to follow a high-standard, people-centered, and sustainable approach to promote high-quality Belt and Road cooperation with partner countries.
中国将继续奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，始终不渝走和平发展道路，在和平共处五项原则基础上发展同各国友好合作关系。我们致力于落实中非合作论坛成果，共筑更加紧密的中非命运共同体。我们致力于在政治、经贸、人文、国际和地区事务等领域加强同拉美地区合作，努力构建携手共进的中拉命运共同体。我们将着眼未来，深化亚太伙伴关系，致力于构建开放包容、创新增长、互联互通、合作共赢的亚太命运共同体。总之，我们愿同国际社会一道努力，朝着构建新型国际关系、构建人类命运共同体的目标不断迈进！
China will stay committed to an independent foreign policy of peace and to the path of peaceful development. We will continue to enhance friendship and cooperation with all other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. To be more specific, China will deliver the follow-ups to the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) and work with Africa for an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future; China will pursue closer cooperation with Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) in political, economic, trade, cultural, and regional and international affairs and build a China-LAC community with a shared future and common progress; and China will take a long-term perspective, deepen the Asia-Pacific partnership, and work for an Asia-Pacific community with a shared future of openness and inclusiveness, innovation-driven growth, greater connectivity, and mutually beneficial cooperation. All in all, China will work with the rest of the international community toward the goal of building a new type of international relationship and of building a community with a shared future for mankind.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
历史可鉴，未来可期。让我们在打造第二个“金色十年”征程中，携手努力、砥砺前行，共同谱写金砖合作、南南合作、世界各国互利合作的新篇章！
A review of historic achievements gives ample room of expectation for the future. As we enter the second "Golden Decade" of BRICS cooperation, let us work in concert and with continued efforts to write a new chapter in not only BRICS cooperation but also South-South cooperation and the mutually beneficial cooperation of countries around the world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.