23. 习近平在尼泊尔媒体发表署名文章《将跨越喜马拉雅的友谊推向新高度》
将跨越喜马拉雅的友谊推向新高度
Toward Greater Progress of China-Nepal Friendship across the Himalayas
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
应班达里总统邀请，我即将对友好邻邦尼泊尔进行国事访问。这是我第一次访问尼泊尔，但尼泊尔对我来说并不陌生。这里壮美秀丽的山川、独具特色的文化，令我心向往之。我多次会见访华的尼泊尔领导人，同他们结下了深厚友谊。我期待着踏上这片神奇的土地，同尼泊尔朋友畅叙友情，共话合作，规划两国关系发展新蓝图。
I will soon pay a state visit to Nepal, a friendly neighbor of China, at the invitation of President Bidya Devi Bhandari. The visit will be my first, yet the country is no strange place to me. I have long wanted to come to Nepal and see for myself its majestic mountains and rivers and unique culture. I have also met in China visiting Nepali leaders on many occasions and developed with them a deep friendship. I now very much look forward to stepping on this wonderful land to renew friendship and explore cooperation with my Nepali friends. I hope we can together draw up a new blueprint for our bilateral ties.
中尼山水相连，世代友好。1600多年前，中国高僧法显、尼泊尔高僧佛驮跋陀罗互访对方国家，合作翻译了流传至今的佛教经典。中国唐代时，尼泊尔尺尊公主同吐蕃赞普松赞干布联姻，高僧玄奘到访释迦牟尼诞生地兰毗尼并留下珍贵文字记录。元代时，尼泊尔著名工艺家阿尼哥率工匠来华，主持修建了北京妙应寺白塔等宏伟建筑。这些友好佳话，激励着两国人民世世代代相知相亲、携手前行。
China and Nepal are close neighbors linked by the same mountains and rivers and enjoy a long-standing friendship. More than 1,600 years ago, the Chinese and Nepali monks Fa Hien and Buddhabhadra visited each other's country and together translated Buddhist scriptures into Chinese. Their translation works have remained influential to this day. In China's Tang Dynasty (618-907), Nepali Princess Bhrikuti was married to Tibetan King Songtsen Gampo, while the Chinese monk Huen Tsang visited Lumbini, the birthplace of the Buddha, and left many precious written accounts of his pilgrimage. Then in the Yuan Dynasty (1271-1368), Arniko, the renowned Nepali architect, led a group of artisans to China and presided over the construction of the White Stupa at the Miaoying Temple in Beijing among several magnificent structures over the country. These are but a few examples of our past interactions that have inspired a lasting friendship between our peoples.
1955年中尼建立外交关系以来，两国始终相互尊重、相互信任、相互支持，成为邻国间平等相待、友好合作、互利共赢的典范。
Since China and Nepal established diplomatic relations in 1955, our two countries have respected each other and trusted and supported each other, setting an example of equality, friendship, and mutually beneficial cooperation between neighboring countries.
——中尼是互尊互信的好朋友。双方在和平共处五项原则基础上顺利划定了两国边界，使巍峨的喜马拉雅山成为连结两国的牢固纽带。双方在涉及彼此核心利益问题上相互坚定支持。尼方坚定奉行一个中国政策，不允许任何势力利用尼泊尔领土从事反华活动。中方坚定支持尼泊尔维护国家主权、独立、领土完整，支持尼方探索符合本国国情的发展道路。
-- China and Nepal are good friends sharing mutual respect and trust. Following the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, we have successfully demarcated our boundaries, turning the great Himalayas into a real bond between our two countries. We support each other on issues of our respective core interests. Nepal stands firm in upholding the one-China policy and prohibits any force from using its territory for anti-China activities. China firmly supports Nepal in safeguarding national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and in pursuing a development path tailored to its national reality.
——中尼是互惠互利的好伙伴。尼泊尔是中国在南亚地区的重要贸易伙伴和发展合作伙伴，去年双边贸易额达到11亿美元，中国对尼泊尔投资超过3亿美元。尼方积极参加共建“一带一路”，双方正在建设和升级包括公路、口岸、机场、电站等在内的基础设施，一个跨越喜马拉雅的联通网络初现雏形，这不仅便利两国，也将造福地区。
-- China and Nepal are good partners for mutually beneficial cooperation. Nepal is China's important trade and development partner in South Asia, with two-way trade reaching 1.1 billion U.S. dollars and Chinese investments in Nepal exceeding 300 million dollars last year. Nepal has been an active participant in the Belt and Road cooperation, and is working with China on a number of infrastructure projects to build or upgrade highways, ports, airports and power plants. A trans-Himalayan connectivity network is thus taking shape, which will serve not just our two countries but also the region as a whole.
——中尼是互学互鉴的好邻居。中国在兰毗尼建设的中华寺，成为中尼宗教文化交流的标志。尼泊尔是南亚首个中国公民出境旅游目的地国，目前每周有约60个航班往来两国之间，每年人员互访达30多万人次。两国已缔结11对友好城市。日益频繁的交往促进了两国人民相互了解，为两国各自发展进步提供了助力。
-- China and Nepal are good neighbors benefiting from people-to-people exchanges. The Zhong Hua Chinese Buddhist Monastery in Lumbini stands as another symbol of our religious and cultural interactions. Nepal is the first South Asian country to be designated an approved destination for Chinese tourists. Between our two countries, there are about 60 flights every week, and over 300,000 mutual visits every year. Eleven pairs of sister cities have been established between the two sides. These growing exchanges have brought our people ever closer and added impetus to the development of both countries.
——中尼是互帮互助的好兄弟。2008年中国汶川遭受特大地震灾害，尼泊尔政府和人民踊跃捐款捐物，支持中国抗震救灾。2015年尼泊尔大地震发生后，中国政府和人民迅速伸出援手，实施大规模救援行动，并支持尼泊尔灾后重建。这生动展现了中尼守望相助的兄弟之情。
-- China and Nepal are good brothers who always stand alongside each other. When a devastating earthquake hit Wenchuan in 2008, the government and people of Nepal made generous donations in support of the rescue and relief efforts in China. Likewise, in the aftermath of the massive earthquake in Nepal in 2015, the Chinese government and people rushed to the aid of Nepal by conducting big rescue operations and supporting post-disaster reconstruction. These are shining examples of how China and Nepal look out for each other like brothers do.
当前，尼泊尔政府和人民正向着“繁荣尼泊尔、幸福尼泊尔人”的美好愿景砥砺前行，中国政府和人民也在朝着“两个一百年”奋斗目标阔步前进。中尼两国人民梦想相通，命运相连。时代要求两国加强合作，共创美好未来。
While the Nepali government and people are vigorously pursuing their vision of "Prosperous Nepal, Happy Nepali," the Chinese government and people are making big strides toward the "two centenary goals." With the aspirations and future of our people closely linked, it is only natural for China and Nepal to respond to the call of our times and step up cooperation for a better future. Working together, the two countries may do just the following:
——我们要深化战略沟通。双方要从战略高度和长远角度擘画新时期中尼关系蓝图，推动两国关系再攀新高。要保持高层交往，增进政治互信，在涉及彼此核心利益问题上继续坚定相互支持。要加强治国理政和发展经验交流分享，更好造福两国人民。
-- Deepen strategic communication. It is important that we adopt a strategic and long-term perspective and draw up a blueprint for our bilateral relationship to take it to a new height in this new era. We need to maintain high-level exchanges, enhance political mutual trust, and continue to render mutual support on issues concerning each other's core interests. We may also have more exchanges and experience sharing on governance and development to deliver greater benefits to our two peoples.
——我们要拓展务实合作。双方要积极推进跨喜马拉雅立体互联互通网络建设。中方支持中资企业赴尼泊尔投资兴业，重点加强贸易投资、灾后重建、能源、旅游四大领域合作。欢迎尼方出席第二届中国国际进口博览会，促进尼泊尔特色优势产品对华出口。中方将继续大力支持尼泊尔灾后重建，为尼泊尔民生改善提供力所能及的支持和帮助。
-- Broaden practical cooperation. We need to make greater efforts to develop a Multi-dimensional Connectivity Network across the Himalayas. China supports Chinese business investment in Nepal in the four priority cooperation areas of trade and investment, post-disaster reconstruction, energy, and tourism. China welcomes Nepal's participation in the second China International Import Expo to promote exports of its specialty products to China. What's more, China will continue to support post-disaster reconstruction and do what it can to support and assist the betterment of people's lives in Nepal.
——我们要扩大人文交流。双方要促进教育、青年、旅游等领域交流合作，支持两国航空企业开通更多直航，增加人员往来规模。中方支持尼方主办“2020尼泊尔旅游年”活动，鼓励更多中国公民赴尼泊尔旅游观光。中方将为尼泊尔优秀青年提供更多政府奖学金，培养更多尼方建设需要的人才。欢迎更多尼泊尔青年学生来华留学深造。
-- Expand people-to-people exchanges. It is important that we encourage more exchanges and cooperation in such areas as education, youth and tourism, and support our airlines in opening more direct flights to increase mutual visits. China supports Nepal in hosting "Visit Nepal Year 2020," and will encourage more Chinese tourists to visit Nepal. China will give more government scholarships to outstanding young Nepalis and help train more professionals needed in Nepal's development endeavor. China welcomes more Nepali students to China.
——我们要加强安全合作。中方支持尼方加强执法能力建设，将同尼方开展执法培训合作。双方要加强边防联系，更有效打击跨境犯罪，确保两国人员安全和经贸往来顺利开展。还要继续加强两军互访、人员培训、装备技术等领域务实合作。
-- Enhance security cooperation. China supports Nepal in building law-enforcement capacity and will carry out law-enforcement training cooperation with Nepal. We need to scale up border defense contacts to fight transnational crimes more effectively and ensure the safety of our nationals and the smooth flow of trade. We also need to strengthen practical cooperation in mil-to-mil visits, personnel training, and equipment and technologies.
尼泊尔人民常说，“滴水也能装满缸”，中国人也讲“众人拾柴火焰高”。我相信，只要两国继承和发扬友好传统，持之以恒扩大交流合作，就一定能把中尼跨越喜马拉雅的友谊推向新高度。
The Nepalis often say, "Drop by drop is the water pot filled." There is also a Chinese saying: "The flame runs high when everyone adds wood to the fire." I am convinced that as long as our two countries carry forward our tradition of friendship and keep increasing our exchanges and cooperation, we will together take our friendship across the Himalayas to a new height.