24. 习近平在二十国集团领导人峰会上关于世界经济形势和贸易问题的讲话
携手共进，合力打造高质量世界经济
Working Together to Build a High-Quality World Economy——在二十国集团领导人峰会上关于世界经济形势和贸易问题的发言（2019年6月28日，大阪）中华人民共和国主席习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
On Global Economy and Trade at the G20 SummitOsaka, 28 June 2019 
各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴同大家在大阪相聚。
It is my great pleasure to join you here in Osaka.
国际金融危机发生10年后，世界经济再次来到十字路口。保护主义、单边主义持续蔓延，贸易和投资争端加剧，全球产业格局和金融稳定受到冲击，世界经济运行风险和不确定性显著上升，国际投资者信心明显不足。
Ten years after the 2008 international financial crisis, the global economy has again reached a crossroads. Protectionism and unilateralism are spreading, and trade and investment tensions are on the rise, bringing disruptions to the global industry landscape and financial stability. The world economy is confronting more risks and uncertainties, dampening the confidence of international investors.
二十国集团是国际经济合作主要论坛。作为世界主要经济体领导人，我们有责任在关键时刻为世界经济和全球治理把准航向，为市场增强信心，给人民带来希望。
The G20 is the premier forum for international economic cooperation. We, as the leaders of major economies, are duty bound to re-calibrate the direction of the world economy and global governance at this critical juncture, work together to boost market confidence, and bring hope to our people.
——我们要尊重客观规律。经济运行有其自身规律。只有充分尊重经济规律，发挥市场作用，扫除人为障碍，才能适应生产力发展要求，实现贸易畅通、百业兴旺。
- We must respect the objective laws of the economy. Economic operation has its underlying laws. Fully respecting these laws, leveraging the role of the market and removing man-made obstacles represent a sure way to raise productivity, boost trade and revitalize all industries.
——我们要把握发展大势。古往今来，人类从闭塞走向开放、从隔绝走向融合是不可阻挡的时代潮流。我们要以更大的开放拥抱发展机遇，以更好的合作谋求互利共赢，引导经济全球化朝正确方向发展。
- We must tap into the prevailing trend of development. The history of human society is marked by a transition from isolation and exclusion to openness and integration. This is an unstoppable trend. We must open up further to embrace opportunities of development and seek win-win outcomes through closer cooperation. We must work together to shape and steer economic globalization in the right direction.
——我们要胸怀共同未来。放眼世界，各国早已休戚相关、命运相连。我们要立足共同利益，着眼长远发展，致力于实现世界持久和平繁荣、各国人民安居乐业，避免因一时短视犯下不可挽回的历史性错误。
- We must keep in mind our shared future. In today's world, all countries' interests are closely intertwined. We have a high stake in each other's future. By expanding common interests and taking a long-term view, we can realize enduring peace and prosperity in the world and deliver a better life to all our people. We must not allow ourselves to become prisoners of short-term interests and make irrevocable mistakes of historic consequences.
我愿提出以下几点建议。
Based on these principles, I would like to share with you a few suggestions:
第一，坚持改革创新，挖掘增长动力。世界经济已经进入新旧动能转换期。我们要找准切入点，大力推进结构性改革，通过发展数字经济、促进互联互通、完善社会保障措施等，建设适应未来发展趋势的产业结构、政策框架、管理体系，提升经济运行效率和韧性，努力实现高质量发展。我们要抓住新技术、新产业、新业态不断涌现的历史机遇，营造有利市场环境，尊重、保护、鼓励创新。我们要提倡国际创新合作，超越疆域局限和人为藩篱，集全球之智，克共性难题，让创新成果得以广泛应用，惠及更多国家和人民。
First, we need to persist in reform and innovation to find more impetus for growth. The world economy is in a transition from old to new drivers of growth. We must find the best way to advance structural reform. We must develop a future-oriented industry structure, policy framework and management system through promoting the digital economy, enhancing connectivity and improving social security, so as to enhance the efficiency and resilience of our economies and strive for high-quality development. We must capitalize on the historic opportunities brought by new technologies, industries and forms of business to foster an enabling market environment where innovation is respected, protected and encouraged. We must champion international collaboration on innovation and rise above geographic and man-made fences. When we put our heads together to resolve the common challenges and spread the fruits of innovation, we can make a difference for more countries and for the life of their peoples.
第二，坚持与时俱进，完善全球治理。当前，经济全球化遇到一些曲折，向我们提出了如何完善全球治理的时代命题。二十国集团应该继续发挥引领作用，确保世界经济开放、包容、平衡、普惠发展。我们要加强多边贸易体制，对世界贸易组织进行必要改革。改革的目的是与时俱进，使得世界贸易组织能够更加有效地践行其开放市场、促进发展的宗旨。改革的结果应当有利于维护自由贸易和多边主义，收窄发展鸿沟。同时，面对未来全球系统性金融风险挑战，我们不但要确保金融安全网资源充足，也要让国际金融架构的代表性更加合理，更好反映世界经济现实格局。这不仅事关公平，也直接影响到应对挑战和危机的针对性和有效性。我们还要落实应对气候变化《巴黎协定》，完善能源治理、环境治理、数字治理。
Second, we need to progress with the times and improve global governance. With economic globalization facing headwinds, we must reflect on the important question of how best to improve global governance. The G20 should continue to take the lead in making the world economy open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial for all. We must strengthen the multilateral trading system and pursue WTO reform as necessary. The goal of the reform is to bring the WTO up to date and make it better able to deliver its mandate of enhancing market openness and boosting development, and the results should be conducive to upholding free trade and multilateralism and to narrowing the development gap. At the same time, the G20 must also anticipate future systemic financial risks and challenges at the global level. We must ensure sufficient resources for the financial safety net and see to it that the representativeness of the international financial architecture makes more sense and better reflects the realities of the world economy. This not only is a matter of fairness, but also affects our ability to take targeted and effective measures to meet challenges and navigate crises when they come our way. It is also very important for the G20 to implement the Paris Agreement and improve energy, environmental and digital governance.
第三，坚持迎难而上，破解发展瓶颈。当今世界面临的各种难题，追根溯源都与发展鸿沟、发展赤字有关。全球范围看，发展领域仍面临巨大融资缺口，落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程任重道远。中国提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的就是动员更多资源，拉紧互联互通纽带，释放增长动力，实现市场对接，让更多国家和地区融入经济全球化，共同走出一条互利共赢的康庄大道。第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛的成功表明，这一倡议是合民心、顺潮流的好事，得到国际社会普遍欢迎和支持。二十国集团应该继续将发展置于宏观经济政策协调的优先位置，增加发展投入，用实实在在的行动引领发展合作。这既是对广大发展中国家期待的回应，也将为世界经济增长增添持久动力。
Third, we need to rise up to challenges and break bottlenecks in development. The myriad challenges facing the world today are all related in one way or another to the development gap and deficit. The gaping shortfall in global development financing means that the realization of the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development remains a daunting task for us. It is against such a backdrop that China proposed the Belt and Road Initiative. The Initiative is designed to mobilize more resources, strengthen connectivity links, leverage potential growth drivers, and connect the markets with a view to integrating more countries and regions into economic globalization and achieving shared prosperity through mutually beneficial cooperation. The success of the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation demonstrates the broad welcome and support for this Initiative from the global community, as it effectively responds to the aspirations of our people and the trend of our times. It is important that the G20 continue to prioritize development in macroeconomic policy coordination, scale up input in development, and lead development cooperation through concrete actions. By doing so, we can live up to the expectations of developing countries and secure a lasting driving force for global growth.
第四，坚持伙伴精神，妥善处理分歧。二十国集团成员汇聚了主要发达经济体和新兴市场经济体，经济总量占世界近90%。我们处在不同发展阶段，在一些问题上存在利益差异和观点分歧很正常。关键是要弘扬伙伴精神，本着相互尊重、相互信任态度，平等协商、求同存异、管控分歧、扩大共识。大国之间如果能做到这一点，不仅符合自身利益，也有利于世界和平与发展。
Fourth, we need to uphold our partnership and resolve differences properly. The G20 is a grouping of major advanced economies and emerging markets, accounting for nearly 90% of the global economy. Given the different development stages of G20 members, it is only natural that we may have diverging interests and views on some issues. The important thing is to always promote our partnership and treat each other with respect and trust, and in that spirit, engage in consultation as equals, manage differences while seeking common ground, and build greater consensus. If this can be achieved between major countries, it will serve not only our own interests but also peace and development in the world.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
当前，中国经济稳中向好，国内生产总值增速连续多年保持在6%以上的合理区间。我们将在近期采取措施的基础上，进一步推出若干重大举措，加快形成对外开放新局面，努力实现高质量发展。
The Chinese economy has continued its stable and sound performance, with its GDP growing within a proper range of more than 6% for years running. On top of the steps we have taken recently, China will further unveil major measures aimed at breaking new ground in opening-up and delivering high-quality development.
第一，进一步开放市场。我们即将发布2019年版外资准入负面清单，进一步扩大农业、采矿业、制造业、服务业开放。新设6个自由贸易试验区，增设上海自由贸易试验区新片区，加快探索建设海南自由贸易港进程。
First, more will be done to open up the Chinese market wider. We will release the 2019 edition of the negative list on foreign investment. The focus will be on greater openness in the agriculture, mining, manufacturing and services sectors. We will set up six new pilot free trade zones and open a new section of the Shanghai Pilot Free Trade Zone, and will speed up exploration of building a free trade port in Hainan province.
第二，主动扩大进口。我们将进一步自主降低关税水平，努力消除非关税贸易壁垒，大幅削减进口环节制度性成本。办好第二届中国国际进口博览会。
Second, greater initiative will be demonstrated in expanding imports. We will further bring down China's overall tariff level, strive to remove non-tariff trade barriers, and slash institutional costs of imports. We will ensure the success of the Second China International Import Expo.
第三，持续改善营商环境。我们将于明年1月1日实施新的外商投资法律制度，引入侵权惩罚性赔偿制度，增强民事司法保护和刑事保护力度，提高知识产权保护水平。
Third, more steps will be taken to improve the business environment. In the new legal framework for foreign investment that is to take effect on 1 January next year, we will introduce a punitive compensation mechanism for intellectual property infringement cases and make the relevant civil and criminal laws more stringent to deliver better IP protection.
第四，全面实施平等待遇。我们将全面取消外资准入负面清单之外的限制。准入后阶段，对在中国境内注册的各类企业平等对待、一视同仁，建立健全外资企业投诉机制。
Fourth, equal treatment will be extended to all foreign investment. We will lift all foreign investment restrictions beyond the negative list, and provide equal treatment to all types of businesses registered in China in the post-establishment phase. A complaint mechanism will be set up for foreign companies to air their grievances.
第五，大力推动经贸谈判。我们将推动早日达成区域全面经济伙伴关系协定，加快中欧投资协定谈判，加快中日韩自由贸易协定谈判进程。
Fifth, greater efforts will be made to advance trade talks. We will push for an early conclusion of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and for faster progress in the negotiations on a China-EU investment agreement and a China-Japan-ROK free trade agreement.
中国有信心走好自己的路、办好自己的事，同世界各国和平共处、合作共赢，共建人类命运共同体，为创造世界经济更加美好的明天不懈努力。
Let me conclude by saying that China has full confidence in following its path and running its own affairs well. At the same time, China will work in the spirit of peaceful co-existence and win-win cooperation with all other countries to build a community with a shared future for mankind and to tirelessly pursue a brighter future of the global economy.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.