25. 习近平在亚信第五次峰会上的讲话
携手开创亚洲安全和发展新局面
Working Together for New Progress of Security and Development in Asia
——在亚信第五次峰会上的讲话（2019年6月15日，杜尚别）
中华人民共和国主席习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Fifth Summit of the Conference 
on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia Dushanbe, 15 June 2019  尊敬的拉赫蒙总统，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency President Emomali Rahmon,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到杜尚别出席亚洲相互协作与信任措施会议第五次峰会，感谢主席国塔吉克斯坦为峰会顺利举行所作的精心准备和周到安排。
It is my great pleasure to attend the Fifth Summit of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia (CICA) here in Dushanbe. I wish to thank the Tajikistan side for being such a thoughtful and hospitable host.
成立亚信是哈萨克斯坦首任总统纳扎尔巴耶夫提出的重要倡议。亚信成立27年来，顺应时代发展潮流，致力于增进各国互信和协作，维护地区安全和稳定，为促进亚洲和平与发展作出了积极贡献。
Establishing CICA was an important initiative proposed by Nursultan Nazarbayev, the first president of Kazakhstan. For the past 27 years, CICA, responding to the trend of the times, has been committed to strengthening trust and coordination among its member states and to promoting security and stability in our region, thus making a valuable contribution to peace and development in Asia.
在亚信上海峰会上，为促进地区和平与发展事业，我提出践行共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观，倡议探索符合亚洲特点和各国共同利益的安全和发展道路，得到各方积极响应。5年来，各方大力支持中方两任主席国和塔方现任主席国工作，不断加深理解、深化合作，共同推动亚信得到新的发展。
It is with promoting regional peace and development in mind that I proposed, at the 2014 Shanghai Summit, a vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and called for exploring a security and development path that suits Asia and serves the common interests of all. My proposal found strong resonance. Over the past five years, the member states have rendered great support to China as a two-term Chair and to Tajikistan as the current Chair. We have strengthened understanding and cooperation among us, and worked together to secure new progress for CICA's development.
中方愿同各方一道，大力支持塔方主席国工作，深化各领域合作，推动亚信进程不断迈上新台阶。中方将举办成员国军事院校校长论坛，以及中小企业、金融、环保、扶贫、人文等领域活动，为亚信发展作出应有贡献。
China will work with other member states to support the Chair, deepen cooperation across the board and take the CICA process to a new level. China will host a forum for the heads of military educational institutions of CICA member states and organize events on small and medium enterprises, financial services, environmental protection, poverty alleviation and people-to-people exchanges so as to play its due role in promoting CICA's development.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
亚洲是当今世界最具发展活力和潜力的地区之一，同时面临政治互信不足、经济发展不平衡、安全和治理问题突出等共同挑战，实现持久和平和共同繁荣任重道远。
Asia is one of the most dynamic regions with great development potential. Asian countries also face some common challenges such as inadequate political trust, uneven economic development and prominent security and governance impediments. Our journey to lasting peace and common prosperity will be a long and arduous one.
“君子务本，本立而道生。”2015年，我提出构筑亚洲命运共同体倡议，阐述了建设亚洲美好明天的共同目标。几年来，亚洲国家在迈向命运共同体过程中，增强了合作意识，丰富了合作实践，积累了合作经验。新形势下，我们要坚持既定目标，共迎机遇、共对挑战，携手开创亚洲安全和发展新局面。
An ancient Chinese philosopher once observed, "The gentleman devotes his attention to the basic of things. When he has mastered the basics, he will find the Way." In 2015, I put forth the initiative of building an Asian community with a shared future and laid out what we can all agree to in building a better Asia. Since then, we Asian countries have better appreciated the value of cooperation, extended our practice of cooperation and gained more experience of cooperation, thus truly moving toward an Asian community with a shared future. Under the current circumstances, we need to stay true to our goal, embrace the opportunities and address the challenges together, and collectively work for new progress of security and development in Asia.
——建设互敬互信的亚洲是我们的共同期待。相互尊重和信任是国与国应有的相处之道。我们要遵循联合国宪章确立的宗旨和原则，尊重各国主权、独立、领土完整，尊重各国自主选择的政治制度和发展道路。要摒弃零和博弈、保护主义，加强政策沟通，增进政治互信，逐步扩大战略共识。
- Building an Asia where countries enjoy mutual respect and trust is our common aspiration. Mutual respect and trust is required in developing state-to-state relations. We need to observe the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of each country and the political system and development path chosen by them. A zero-sum mentality and protectionism must be rejected in favor of more policy communication and political trust, so that we can expand our strategic consensus.
——建设安全稳定的亚洲是我们的共同目标。谋求共同、综合、合作、可持续安全，就是为了实现地区国家整体安全。我们要坚持对话而不对抗、结伴而不结盟，妥善应对各种传统和非传统安全问题，特别是要坚决打击一切形式的恐怖主义。要注重采取各种有效的预防性措施，从根源上防范极端思潮的滋生。要探讨建立符合亚洲特点的地区安全架构，追求普遍安全和共同安全。
- Building a secure and stable Asia is our common objective. The vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security is about realizing the security of all countries in the region as a whole. Confrontation and alliances must be eschewed in favor of dialogue and partnership. We must find proper solutions to traditional and non-traditional security issues and, in particular, deal firmly with terrorism in all its forms. We must take effective preventive measures of various sorts to eradicate the breeding ground of extremist ideology, and explore a regional security architecture suited to Asia's realities, one that will enhance universal security for us all.
——建设发展繁荣的亚洲是我们的共同愿景。发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。我们要共同推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，早日达成《区域全面经济伙伴关系协定》等区域一体化文件。要落实今年4月第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛共识，加强发展战略对接，促进全方位互联互通，推动各国经济高质量发展。
- Building a growing and prosperous Asia is our common vision. Development is the master key to all problems. We need to jointly promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and conclude at an early date the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership and other documents on regional integration. We need to work on the follow-ups to the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation held in April this year, seek greater complementarity between our development strategies, and enhance all-round connectivity to boost high-quality growth of all countries.
——建设开放包容的亚洲是我们的共同追求。封闭的空间只会四处碰壁，开放的道路才会越走越宽。我们要落实好今年5月亚洲文明对话大会共识，树立平等、互鉴、对话、包容的文明观。要扩大域内外国家间人文交往，以多样共存超越文明优越，以和谐共生超越文明冲突，以交融共享超越文明隔阂，以繁荣共进超越文明固化。
- Building an open and inclusive Asia is our common pursuit. Isolation would lead us nowhere, while openness would offer us infinite possibilities. We need to implement the consensus reached at last month's Conference on Dialogue of Asian Civilizations, and promote equality, mutual learning, dialogue and mutual accommodation between civilizations. We need to encourage more people-to-people exchanges among countries both in and outside the region so that when it comes to civilizations, respect for diversity will replace a sense of superiority, harmonious co-existence will replace conflict, interaction and sharing will replace estrangement, and prosperity and progress for all will replace self-imposed isolation and ossification.
——建设合作创新的亚洲是我们的共同需要。变革创新是推动人类文明进步的强大动力。我们要顺应时代变化，把勇于革新的理念落实到行动层面，加强理论、制度、科技、文化等各方面创新，永葆亚洲发展活力。要敢于推陈出新，努力为解决老问题寻找新答案，为应对新问题寻找好答案，破解亚洲面临的各类难题。
- Building a cooperative and creative Asia is our common need. Reform and innovation is a powerful driving force behind the progress of human civilization. We must, in light of the changing times, translate our readiness for innovation into concrete actions, and break more new ground in theory, system, science and technology, and culture, among other areas, to keep the vibrancy of a growing Asia. We need to think outside the box to find new solutions to old problems and good solutions to new ones. This way, we will be better able to address the various challenges facing Asia.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
中国始终坚持同亚洲国家发展睦邻友好关系，参与创建亚信、上海合作组织、亚洲基础设施投资银行等多边安全和发展机制，支持东盟、南盟、阿盟等发挥积极作用，为亚洲稳定和繁荣作出重要贡献。作为亚洲大家庭一员和国际社会负责任大国，中国将继续做世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者，推动构建新型国际关系和人类命运共同体。
China is committed to developing good-neighborly and friendly ties with other Asian countries. China has participated in the establishment of such multilateral security and development mechanisms as CICA, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and supported the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the League of Arab States and other organizations in playing their active roles, thus making an important contribution to stability and prosperity in Asia. As a member of the Asian family and a responsible major country in the global community, China will continue to build peace, contribute to development and uphold order in the world, and work for a new type of international relations and a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，我们将坚定走和平发展道路，决不损人利己、以邻为壑。中方将继续在和平共处五项原则基础上深化同各国的友好合作，通过和平方式处理同有关国家的领土主权和海洋权益争端，支持对话协商解决地区热点问题。
First, China will stay committed to peaceful development and reject a beggar-thy-neighbor approach. China will continue to deepen its friendship and cooperation with other countries on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence, pursue peaceful settlement to disputes with relevant countries over territorial sovereignty and maritime rights and interests, and support negotiated solutions to regional hotspot issues.
第二，我们将坚持开放共赢，同各国分享发展机遇。中方愿同各方用好共建“一带一路”国际合作平台，为共同发展持续注入强大动能。中方今年将举办第二届中国国际进口博览会，努力为各方进入中国市场创造更多便利条件。
Second, China will stay committed to opening-up for win-win outcomes and share development opportunities with other countries. China will work with all other parties to make good use of the platform of Belt and Road cooperation to secure a sustained driver for our common development. Later this year, China will host the Second China International Import Expo to further facilitate access to the Chinese market.
第三，我们将坚定践行多边主义，维护以国际法为基础的国际秩序。中方愿同各国一道，秉持共商共建共享的全球治理观，坚定维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，坚定维护以世界贸易组织为核心的多边贸易体制。对于经贸往来中出现的问题，各方都应该本着相互尊重的精神，通过平等对话协商，按照国际关系准则和多边贸易规则妥善处理，而不是动辄诉诸保护主义、单边主义。中国的这一立场，不仅是在维护各国的正当发展权利，也是在维护国际公平正义。
Third, China will stay committed to practicing multilateralism to safeguard the international order underpinned by international law. China will work with other countries to advocate extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits in global governance, and firmly uphold the UN-centered international system and the multilateral trading system with the WTO at its core. With regard to any problem that occurs on the economic and trade front, all sides need to act in the spirit of mutual respect and handle it appropriately through equal-footed dialogue and consultation in accordance with norms in international relations and multilateral trading rules, rather than resort to protectionism and unilateralism at every turn. By taking such a position, China is upholding the legitimate development rights and interests of all countries and, for that matter, fairness and justice in the world.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
塔吉克民族伟大诗人鲁达基曾写道，“智者追求善良与和平，愚者才醉心争吵和战争。”中方愿同各方携手努力，不懈追求和平、稳定、繁荣，共同创造亚洲和世界的美好未来。
As the great Tajik poet Rudaki wrote, "The wise pursue kindness and peace; only the fool are bent on strife and war." Let us join hands in a tireless pursuit of peace, stability and prosperity and usher in a brighter future for Asia and beyond.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.