26. 习近平主席在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议上的讲话
凝心聚力　务实笃行
共创上海合作组织美好明天
Staying Focused and Taking Solid Actions
For a Brighter Future of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
——在上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议上的讲话（2019年6月14日，比什凯克）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the 19th Meeting of the Council of Heads of State of
The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)Bishkek, 14 June 2019 
尊敬的热恩别科夫总统，
尊敬的各位同事：
Your Excellency President Sooronbay Jeenbekov,
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴来到美丽的比什凯克出席上海合作组织成员国元首理事会第十九次会议。感谢东道国吉尔吉斯斯坦为本次会议所作的精心准备和周到安排。吉方去年6月接任轮值主席国以来，为推动组织发展做了大量工作，中方高度评价。
It gives me great pleasure to attend the 19th meeting of the SCO Council of Heads of State in the beautiful city of Bishkek. Let me begin by thanking our host Kyrgyzstan for the great preparation and thoughtful arrangements for this event. China highly commends the tremendous efforts Kyrgyzstan has made to promote the development of the SCO since taking over the SCO presidency last June.
青岛峰会以来，上海合作组织保持良好发展势头。中方在峰会上提出的发展观、安全观、合作观、文明观、全球治理观，丰富了本组织合作理念，得到各方积极响应。成员国以“上海精神”为指引，认真落实领导人共识，促进各领域合作不断走深走实，推动上海合作组织在新起点上实现新发展。
The SCO has maintained a sound momentum of development since the Qingdao Summit. The propositions on development, security, cooperation, civilization and global governance put forth by China at the Qingdao Summit were warmly received by all sides and added to the SCO's vision on cooperation. Guided by the Shanghai Spirit and the consensus of the leaders, SCO members have deepened cooperation in various fields and scored new achievements in moving the organization forward from a new starting point.
当前，国际形势风云激荡，但和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流不可逆转。“欲粟者务时，欲治者因势。”我们要牢牢把握世界多极化、经济全球化大势，从“上海精神”中发掘智慧，从团结合作中获取力量，携手构建更加紧密的上海合作组织命运共同体。
Despite immense changes in the international situation, peace, development and win-win cooperation remain the irreversible trend of our times. As a line in the Chinese classics goes, "Those who farm observe the shift of seasons, those who govern follow the change of the world." We need to keep a profound understanding of the overriding trend toward multi-polarity and economic globalization, draw inspiration from the wisdom of the Shanghai Spirit, and seek strength from solidarity and cooperation so as to jointly build a closer SCO community with a shared future.
第一，我们要把上海合作组织打造成团结互信的典范。上海合作组织保持强劲发展势头，成为促进地区安全稳定和发展繁荣的重要建设性力量，根本原因在于始终遵循“上海精神”、不断加强团结互信。我们要肩负起上海合作组织各国人民的重托，心往一处想，劲往一处使，不断汇聚实现共同目标的强大力量。
First, we must make the SCO an example of solidarity and mutual trust. The SCO has maintained a strong momentum of development and become an important and constructive force for regional security, stability and prosperity. The ultimate reason for its success lies in the Shanghai Spirit, which calls for continued enhancement of solidarity and mutual trust. We have on our shoulders the expectations of the people of SCO countries and we must think and work in one mind to build the momentum we need to achieve our common goal.
要坚持将“上海精神”作为本组织核心价值和共同理念，并根据形势变化和组织发展不断赋予其新的时代内涵。要恪守上海合作组织宪章、长期睦邻友好合作条约确立的宗旨和原则，增进政治互信，加大相互支持，扩大利益汇合点，为深化双边和多边合作创造更加有利的条件。
The Shanghai Spirit embodies the core values and common vision of the SCO. It has to be upheld and kept up-to-date in light of the evolving circumstances and the development of the organization. We must abide by the purposes and principles established by the SCO Charter and the Treaty on Long-term Good Neighborliness, Friendship and Cooperation, strengthen political mutual trust, give each other greater support, expand convergence of interests and create more favorable conditions to deepen bilateral and multilateral cooperation.
第二，我们要把上海合作组织打造成安危共担的典范。多年来，上海合作组织成员国着眼共同安全命运，开展务实高效安全合作，确保了本地区安全稳定大局。当前，面对恐怖主义、极端主义等严峻威胁，各方需要采取有力措施联手应对。
Second, we must make the SCO an example of common security. Over the years, guided by the vision of common security and a shared future, SCO members have carried out practical and highly efficient cooperation on the security front and ensured the overall security and stability of the region. Facing grave challenges from terrorism, extremism and other threats, we must all act together and with forceful measures to tackle our common challenges.
要秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，不断完善安全合作的法律基础，加强信息共享、联合行动、网络执法，着力提升本组织应对复杂局面的能力。要多措并举打击“三股势力”，扎牢安全篱笆，防范恐怖极端势力回流。要以《上海合作组织反极端主义公约》生效为契机，加强去极端化合作，有效遏制极端思想蔓延势头。阿富汗和上海合作组织成员国比邻而居，同时也是本组织重要观察员国。我们一直高度关注阿富汗局势，对阿富汗人民蒙受的战乱苦难感同身受。上海合作组织坚定支持“阿人主导，阿人所有”的阿富汗和平和解进程，将进一步发挥“上海合作组织-阿富汗联络组”作用，提升各领域合作水平，为阿富汗早日实现和平、和解、稳定、发展发挥建设性作用。中方愿继续为阿富汗和平重建提供力所能及的帮助。
We must pursue common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We must further improve the legal foundation for security cooperation. We must step up information sharing, joint operations and cyber law enforcement to strengthen the SCO's ability to respond to complex situations. We must take a multi-pronged approach against terrorism, separatism and extremism, and fend off the resurgence of extremist and terrorist forces. As the SCO Convention on Countering Extremism enters into effect, we must further strengthen cooperation on deradicalization to curb the spread of extremist ideology. Afghanistan is neighbor to many SCO member countries and an important observer state of the organization. We have been following the developments in Afghanistan closely. Our thoughts are with the Afghan people who are suffering from war and chaos. The SCO firmly supports the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process. We will make full use of the SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group, step up cooperation in various fields and play a constructive role in the early realization of peace, reconciliation, stability and development in Afghanistan. China will continue to do what it can to help with Afghanistan's peace and reconstruction.
第三，我们要把上海合作组织打造成互利共赢的典范。上海合作组织地区整体发展势头良好，在全球经济中所占比重稳步增加，对世界经济增长的贡献率不断提升。本地区拥有资源禀赋丰富、市场规模巨大、科技创新实力雄厚等无可比拟的优越条件，发展动力十足，合作前景广阔。我们要顺势而为，推动地区融合发展不断取得新成果。
Third, we must make the SCO an example of mutually beneficial cooperation. SCO countries enjoy a sound momentum of development on the whole, as evidenced by the steady increase of the region's share in the world economy and its contribution to global growth. Our region's incomparable advantages like rich natural endowment, a huge market, and strong scientific and technological innovation capability provide us with abundant driving force for development and bright prospects for cooperation. We need to seize the momentum and strive for new progress in the integrated development of the region.
要倡导维护多边贸易体制、构建开放型世界经济，推动在贸易和投资自由化便利化方面作出更多制度性安排，用好中国国际进口博览会等合作共享平台，促进区域经济进一步开放、交流、融合。要认真落实第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成果，充分利用本地区国家独特优势，推动共建“一带一路”倡议同各国发展战略及欧亚经济联盟等区域合作倡议深入对接。要发挥上海合作组织成员国政府间国际道路运输便利化协定联委会等机制作用，提升铁路、公路、油气管道等联通水平，着力构建全方位互联互通格局。
We must uphold the multilateral trading system, build an open world economy, work toward more institutional arrangements on trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and make full use of such cooperation and sharing platforms as the China International Import Expo to pursue greater economic openness, exchange and integration in our region. It is important that we earnestly deliver on the outcomes of the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation (BRF) and give full play to the unique strengths of countries in the region to better synergize the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) with the development strategies of countries in the region as well as regional cooperation initiatives such as the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU). We need to leverage the Joint Commission on Facilitation of International Road Transport and other relevant mechanisms to make railways, highways, and oil and gas pipelines more interconnected, so as to achieve all-round connectivity.
要坚持创新驱动发展，在数字经济、电子商务、人工智能、大数据等领域培育合作增长点。中方愿在陕西省设立上海合作组织农业技术交流培训示范基地，加强同地区国家现代农业领域合作。
We need to pursue innovation-driven development and foster new areas of cooperation such as digital economy, e-commerce, artificial intelligence and big data. China will be happy to set up an SCO demonstration base in Shaanxi Province for exchange and training on agricultural technologies to strengthen cooperation on modern agriculture with other countries in the region.
第四，我们要把上海合作组织打造成包容互鉴的典范。上海合作组织地区孕育了众多古老文明，不同民族、不同文化、不同宗教在此交融汇聚，相得益彰。我们要珍惜本地区文明多样性这一宝贵财富，摒弃文明冲突，坚持开放包容、互学互鉴，为各国人民世代友好、共同发展进步注入持久动力。
Fourth, we must make the SCO an example of inclusiveness and mutual learning. Our region is home to many ancient civilizations where different nations, cultures and religions have coexisted and drawn strength from each other. We need to celebrate the diversity of civilizations as a precious asset of our region, and say no to the idea of clash of civilizations. We need to uphold openness, inclusiveness and mutual learning, with a view to creating durable impetus for the lasting friendship between our peoples and the common development of our countries.
要不断深化文化、教育、旅游、体育、媒体等领域合作，密切妇女、青年等群体交流，不断提升民众参与度和获得感。上海合作组织医疗机构和企业上个月在中国广西防城港市成功举办国际医学创新合作论坛，各方达成许多合作共识。我们支持在防城港市建立国际医学开放试验区，继续推动上海合作组织医学创新合作。中方愿意适时举办上海合作组织传统医学论坛，发挥传统医学优势，改善民众健康，提高医疗卫生水平。去年以来，俄罗斯车里雅宾斯克市、中国重庆市分别成功举办上海合作组织地方领导人会晤。我们要落实好本次峰会将批准的地方合作文件，广泛调动地方和社会力量，将地方合作打造成人文合作新亮点。
We need to deepen our cooperation in culture, education, tourism, sports and media, and strengthen exchanges between women, the youth and other communities to ensure greater involvement of and greater benefit for our people. Last month, an International Medical Innovation and Cooperation Forum was successfully held in Fangchenggang in Guangxi Province of China, where participants from medical institutions and businesses of SCO countries reached extensive common ground on cooperation. We also support the initiative to set up an International Medical Opening-up Pilot Zone (China) in Fangchenggang to further promote medical innovation and cooperation within the SCO. China will be happy to host an SCO forum on traditional medicine in due time to help improve public health and medical services through traditional medicine. Since last year, Chelyabinsk of Russia and Chongqing of China have successfully held the first and second SCO Heads of Region Meetings. We need to earnestly implement the documents on sub-national cooperation to be approved by this summit and mobilize local governments and private actors to make sub-national cooperation a new highlight in our people-to-people cooperation.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
面对日益增多的全球性挑战，我们要展现应有的国际担当，坚持共商共建共享的全球治理观，密切协调和配合，维护以联合国为核心的国际体系，促进多边主义和自由贸易，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。上海合作组织要完善伙伴关系布局，鼓励观察员国、对话伙伴更广泛参加各领域合作，加强同联合国等国际和地区组织交流，在国际和地区事务中发挥更加积极作用，共同致力于促进世界持久和平和共同繁荣。
In the face of increasing global challenges, it is imperative that we live up to our international responsibilities, stay committed to the vision of global governance based on extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, and step up coordination and collaboration. It is imperative that we uphold the international system with the United Nations at its core, promote multilateralism and free trade and make the international order more just and equitable. The SCO needs to improve its network of partnerships, encourage broader participation in cooperation by observer states and dialogue partners, strengthen exchanges with the UN and other international and regional organizations, play a more active role in international and regional affairs, and jointly contribute to durable peace and common prosperity of the world.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
中方祝贺吉方成功举办这次峰会并圆满完成主席国工作，祝贺普京总统接任本组织元首理事会主席，愿同各成员国一道，全力支持俄方主席国工作。
China extends congratulations to Kyrgyzstan for successfully hosting this summit upon wrapping up its SCO presidency, and to President Vladimir Putin for taking over the chairmanship of the SCO Council of Heads of State. China will work with all other SCO members to provide Russia with full support in its work.
吉尔吉斯斯坦有句谚语，“生存的力量在于团结。”让我们秉持“上海精神”，凝心聚力，务实笃行，共同创造上海合作组织更加美好的明天！
As a Kyrgyz saying goes, "From solidarity comes our strength for survival." Let us act in the Shanghai Spirit, stay focused and take solid actions for an even brighter future of the SCO.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.