31. 习近平在2019年北京世界园艺博览会开幕式上的讲话
共谋绿色生活，共建美丽家园
Working Together for a Green and Better Future for All
——在2019年中国北京世界园艺博览会开幕式上的讲话
（2019年4月28日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 Beijing China
Beijing, 28 April 2019 
尊敬的各位国家元首，政府首脑和夫人，
尊敬的国际展览局秘书长和国际园艺生产者协会主席，
尊敬的各国使节，各位国际组织代表，
女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government and Your Spouses,
Your Excellency Secretary General of the Bureau International des Expositions,
Your Excellency President of the International Association of Horticultural Producers,
Your Excellencies Diplomatic Envoys and Representatives of International Organizations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
“迟日江山丽，春风花草香。”四月的北京，春回大地，万物复苏。很高兴同各位嘉宾相聚在雄伟的长城脚下、美丽的妫水河畔，共同拉开2019年中国北京世界园艺博览会大幕。
"Spring scenery greets the eye; sweet blooms perfume the air." Such is the delight of April in Beijing, full of exuberance and vitality, as depicted by an ancient Chinese poem. By the beautiful Guishui River and at the foot of the majestic Great Wall, we are very glad to welcome all the distinguished guests to the opening of the International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 Beijing China.
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对远道而来的各位嘉宾，表示热烈的欢迎！对支持和参与北京世界园艺博览会的各国朋友，表示衷心的感谢！
On behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I wish to extend a warm welcome to all the guests coming to the Expo and sincere appreciation to all the friends for their support and participation.
北京世界园艺博览会以“绿色生活，美丽家园”为主题，旨在倡导人们尊重自然、融入自然、追求美好生活。北京世界园艺博览会园区，同大自然的湖光山色交相辉映。我希望，这片园区所阐释的绿色发展理念能传导至世界各个角落。
The Expo, as indicated by its theme "Live Green, Live Better", aims to promote respect for nature and a better life in harmony with nature. It is our hope that this Expo Park, designed to blend into its splendid surrounding landscape, will show the world the vision of green development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
锦绣中华大地，是中华民族赖以生存和发展的家园，孕育了中华民族5000多年的灿烂文明，造就了中华民族天人合一的崇高追求。
This beautiful land of China, home to the Chinese nation and its splendid 5,000-year civilization, has nurtured the lofty idea of harmony between man and nature.
现在，生态文明建设已经纳入中国国家发展总体布局，建设美丽中国已经成为中国人民心向往之的奋斗目标。中国生态文明建设进入了快车道，天更蓝、山更绿、水更清将不断展现在世人面前。
Ecological conservation has become part of China's overall plan for national development. Building a beautiful China is an inspiring goal for the Chinese people. As China steps up its conservation efforts, the world will see a China with more blue skies, lush mountains and lucid waters.
纵观人类文明发展史，生态兴则文明兴，生态衰则文明衰。工业化进程创造了前所未有的物质财富，也产生了难以弥补的生态创伤。杀鸡取卵、竭泽而渔的发展方式走到了尽头，顺应自然、保护生态的绿色发展昭示着未来。
The history of civilizations shows that the rise or fall of a civilization is closely tied to its relationship with nature. Industrialization, while generating unprecedented material wealth, has incurred serious damage to Mother Nature. Development without thought to the future is not sustainable. The way forward should be green development that focuses on harmony with nature and eco-friendly progress.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen, Friends,
仰望夜空，繁星闪烁。地球是全人类赖以生存的唯一家园。我们要像保护自己的眼睛一样保护生态环境，像对待生命一样对待生态环境，同筑生态文明之基，同走绿色发展之路！
Looking up at night, we are awed by the many stars in the sky. Yet, planet Earth is the only home for mankind. We must protect this planet like our own eyes, and cherish nature the way we cherish life. We must preserve what gives our planet life and embrace green development.
——我们应该追求人与自然和谐。山峦层林尽染，平原蓝绿交融，城乡鸟语花香。这样的自然美景，既带给人们美的享受，也是人类走向未来的依托。无序开发、粗暴掠夺，人类定会遭到大自然的无情报复；合理利用、友好保护，人类必将获得大自然的慷慨回报。我们要维持地球生态整体平衡，让子孙后代既能享有丰富的物质财富，又能遥望星空、看见青山、闻到花香。
- We need to advocate harmony between man and nature. Lush mountains, green fields, singing birds and blossoming flowers offer more than beauty to the eye. They are the basis for future development. Nature will punish those who exploit and plunder it brutally, and reward those who use and protect it carefully. We must maintain the overall balance of the Earth's eco-system, so that our children and children's children will not only have material wealth but also enjoy starry skies, green mountains and sweet flowers.
——我们应该追求绿色发展繁荣。绿色是大自然的底色。我一直讲，绿水青山就是金山银山，改善生态环境就是发展生产力。良好生态本身蕴含着无穷的经济价值，能够源源不断创造综合效益，实现经济社会可持续发展。
- We need to pursue prosperity through green development. Green is the color of nature. I have always said that green mountains and lucid waters are indeed mountains of gold and silver, and that environmental improvement means greater productivity. A sound environment promises great economic potential, generates good returns, and contributes to economic and social sustainability.
——我们应该追求热爱自然情怀。“取之有度，用之有节”，是生态文明的真谛。我们要倡导简约适度、绿色低碳的生活方式，拒绝奢华和浪费，形成文明健康的生活风尚。要倡导环保意识、生态意识，构建全社会共同参与的环境治理体系，让生态环保思想成为社会生活中的主流文化。要倡导尊重自然、爱护自然的绿色价值观念，让天蓝地绿水清深入人心，形成深刻的人文情怀。
- We need to follow a philosophy that cares for nature. Well-measured use of natural resources is the key to ecological conservation. We need to promote a simpler, greener and low-carbon lifestyle, oppose excessiveness and foster a culture of living green and living healthy. We need to raise people's awareness, develop a conservation system in which everyone plays a part, and mainstream ecological conservation into every aspect of social life. We need to advocate the value of green development that reveres and cares for nature so that blue skies, green fields and clear waters will be a vision cherished by all.
——我们应该追求科学治理精神。生态治理必须遵循规律，科学规划，因地制宜，统筹兼顾，打造多元共生的生态系统。只有赋之以人类智慧，地球家园才会充满生机活力。生态治理，道阻且长，行则将至。我们既要有只争朝夕的精神，更要有持之以恒的坚守。
- We need to adopt a scientific approach to ecological conservation. To create an eco-system where all elements coexist in harmony, we need to follow the laws of nature, base our efforts on scientific planning, adopt a holistic approach to conservation, and factor in local conditions. Human wisdom is essential to sustaining the dynamism of Earth, our common homeland. Ecological conservation may be a long and arduous effort. We must press ahead with a sense of urgency and perseverance to achieve our goals.
——我们应该追求携手合作应对。建设美丽家园是人类的共同梦想。面对生态环境挑战，人类是一荣俱荣、一损俱损的命运共同体，没有哪个国家能独善其身。唯有携手合作，我们才能有效应对气候变化、海洋污染、生物保护等全球性环境问题，实现联合国2030年可持续发展目标。只有并肩同行，才能让绿色发展理念深入人心、全球生态文明之路行稳致远。
- We need to join hands to meet common challenges. A beautiful homeland is the shared aspiration of mankind. In the face of environmental challenges, all countries are in a community with destinies linked, and no country can stay immune. Only together can we effectively address climate change, marine pollution, biological conservation and other global environmental issues and achieve the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Only concerted efforts can drive home the idea of green development and bring about steady progress in the ecological conservation of the globe.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
昨天，第二届“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛成功闭幕，在座许多嘉宾出席了论坛。共建“一带一路”就是要建设一条开放发展之路，同时也必须是一条绿色发展之路。这是与会各方达成的重要共识。中国愿同各国一道，共同建设美丽地球家园，共同构建人类命运共同体。
Many of you attended the Second Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation, which drew to a successful conclusion yesterday. It was agreed at the Forum that we will pursue open and green development in Belt and Road cooperation. China is ready to work with all other countries to build a better homeland and a community with a shared future for mankind.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
一代人有一代人的使命。建设生态文明，功在当代，利在千秋。让我们从自己、从现在做起，把接力棒一棒一棒传下去。
Every generation has its own mission. Our efforts to conserve the eco-system will benefit not only this generation, but many more to come. Let us act now, start with ourselves, and make sure that the baton of conservation will be passed on.
我宣布，2019年中国北京世界园艺博览会开幕！
I now declare open the International Horticultural Exhibition 2019 Beijing China!