45. 习近平同中非合作论坛前任和新任非方共同主席国元首共见记者时的讲话
同中非合作论坛前任和新任非方共同主席国元首共见记者时的讲话
（2018年9月4日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the Joint Meeting with the Press Together with 
Presidents of the Previous and Sitting African Co-Chairs of FOCAC 
Beijing, 4 September 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的萨勒总统，
各位记者朋友，
女士们，先生们：
Your Excellency President Matamela Cyril Ramaphosa, 
Your Excellency President Macky Sall, 
Friends from the Press, 
Ladies and Gentlemen,
下午好！很高兴同大家见面。
Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to meet you here.
首先，我高兴地宣布，2018年中非合作论坛北京峰会刚刚圆满落幕！
First of all, it is my pleasure to announce that the 2018 Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) has just successfully concluded.
两天来，中非合作论坛成员方领导人齐聚北京，围绕“合作共赢，携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体”主题，回顾了2015年论坛约翰内斯堡峰会成果落实情况，谋划了中非关系未来发展，绘制了中非合作宏伟蓝图。会议发表了《关于构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体的北京宣言》，凝聚了中非双方对当前重大国际和地区问题的共识，向世界传递了中非携手并进的强烈信号。会议通过了《中非合作论坛－北京行动计划》，确定了未来3年中非将以实施“八大行动”为重点，全面加强各领域务实合作。
In the past two days, leaders of FOCAC members gathered in Beijing under the theme of "China and Africa: Toward an Even Stronger Community with a Shared Future through Win-Win Cooperation". We reviewed implementation of the outcomes of the 2015 FOCAC Johannesburg Summit, discussed plans for future growth of China-Africa relations, and drew the blueprint for China-Africa cooperation to go ahead. The Summit issued the Beijing Declaration -- Toward an Even Stronger China-Africa Community with a Shared Future, which embodies the agreement reached between China and Africa on major regional and international issues in today's world and sends out a strong message that China and Africa will go hand in hand in years to come. The Summit adopted the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation Beijing Action Plan, and identified eight major initiatives as the focus of China-Africa cooperation in the coming three years to strengthen practical cooperation across the board. 
我们一致认为，当今世界正经历百年未有之大变局，世界多极化、经济全球化深入发展，各国人民的命运从未像今天这样紧紧相连。同时，世界面临的不稳定性不确定性突出，人类面临许多共同挑战。我们愿携起手来，共同打造责任共担、合作共赢、幸福共享、文化共兴、安全共筑、和谐共生的中非命运共同体，更好维护中非共同利益，壮大发展中国家力量，让我们生活的世界变得更加均衡美好，为推动构建人类命运共同体树立时代榜样。
We agreed that the world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century. Economic globalization is deepening in an increasingly multipolar world. The future of the world's people has never been so closely linked. Meanwhile, mankind faces a host of common challenges as uncertainties and destabilizing factors continue to mount. China and Africa will join hands to build a China-Africa community with a shared future that features joint responsibility, win-win cooperation, happiness for all, common cultural prosperity, common security, and harmonious co-existence. Together, we will better uphold the common interests of China and Africa, boost the strength of developing countries, and make the world a more balanced and better place for everyone to live in. This will set a good example for the building of a community with a shared future for mankind in our times.
我们一致认为，中非关系历经时间洗礼和国际风云变幻考验，走出了一条特色鲜明的合作共赢之路，正处于历史最好时期。中非双方愿加强战略对接和政策协调，推进中非共建“一带一路”合作，并将“一带一路”建设同非洲联盟《2063年议程》、联合国2030年可持续发展议程、非洲各国发展战略紧密对接，重点实施好产业促进、设施联通、贸易便利、绿色发展、能力建设、健康卫生、人文交流、和平安全“八大行动”，为中非合作提供更多机遇、增添更强动力。
We agreed that China-Africa relations have stood the test of time and international changes and embarked on a distinctive path of win-win cooperation. China-Africa relations are at their best in history. The two sides will enhance synergy between strategies and policies, advance cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative, and pool the strength of this Initiative with that of Agenda 2063 of the African Union, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the United Nations, and national development strategies of African countries. The focus will be on the implementation of eight major initiatives, namely, industrial promotion, infrastructure connectivity, trade facilitation, green development, capacity building, health care, people-to-people exchange, and peace and security. It will provide more opportunities and give even stronger impetus to China-Africa cooperation.
我们一致认为，中非关系呈现出前所未有的凝聚力、生命力、创造力，为中非各自发展提供了重要机遇。中国是最大的发展中国家，非洲是发展中国家最集中的大陆。中非将矢志不渝加强团结合作，在合作共赢、共同发展的道路上结伴前行。中国将继续秉持真实亲诚理念和正确义利观，同非洲一道，从中非友好互信的深厚底蕴中汲取力量，在中非务实合作的蓬勃势头中把握方向，推动中非全面战略合作伙伴关系向深走实、行稳致远。
We agreed that China-Africa relations have demonstrated unprecedented solidarity, vitality and creativity, which offers significant opportunities for the development of each side. China is the biggest developing country, and Africa the continent with a large gathering of developing countries in the world. The two sides will stay committed to strengthening unity and cooperation and working with each other along the path of win-win cooperation and common development. China will continue to act in the principle of sincerity, real results, amity and good faith and of pursuing the greater good and shared interests. Together, China and Africa will draw on the strength of our profound friendship and mutual trust, keep to the right direction as practical cooperation flourishes, and work for solid, steady and sustained growth of the China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership.
我们一致认为，实现发展振兴是非洲的应有权利，需要非洲国家和人民努力，也离不开国际社会支持。中非合作是国际对非合作的一部分，中非合作一贯坚持互利共赢、开放包容。我们希望国际合作伙伴相互学习借鉴，发挥各自优势，形成合力，共同为非洲和平与发展作出贡献。在对非合作中，国际社会各方都要尊重非洲主权，倾听非洲意见，重视非洲主张，兑现对非洲的承诺。
We agreed that Africa is entitled to achieving development and invigoration. This requires both the hard work of African countries and their people, and the support from the international community. China-Africa cooperation, as part of the international cooperation with Africa, follows the principle of mutual benefit, openness and inclusiveness. We hope that Africa's international cooperation partners could learn from each other, leverage their respective strengths, build synergy and jointly contribute to peace and development in Africa. While conducting cooperation with Africa, all parties of the international community need to respect the sovereignty of African countries, listen to Africa's voice, take Africa's stance seriously and deliver on the promises made to Africa.
会议顺利完成了既定日程，中非领导人在所有重大问题上都达成重要共识，发出了共同声音。北京峰会取得圆满成功，收获的是沉甸甸的成果，揭开了中非关系新的历史篇章，树立了南南合作新的时代丰碑。
The meeting has completed all items on the agenda. Chinese and African leaders have reached significant common ground and spoken with one voice on all major issues. The Beijing Summit has achieved great success and produced significant outcomes. It has opened a new chapter in the history of China-Africa relations and set a new milestone for South-South cooperation of our times.
借中非友好大家庭团聚的机会，中非领导人这几天举行了密集的双边会晤，一些非洲国家元首和政府首脑还对中国已经或即将进行访问。我同所有出席北京峰会和访华的非方领导人举行了双边会晤，就双边关系及共同关心的问题深入交换意见，达成广泛重要共识。
Over the past few days, Chinese and African leaders also had intensive bilateral meetings during this friendly gathering of the big China-Africa family, and some African heads of state and government have paid or will pay bilateral visits to China. I had bilateral meetings with all the African leaders who attended the Beijing Summit and visited China. We had in-depth exchange of views and reached broad and significant common understanding on our respective bilateral relations and issues of shared interest.
中非合作论坛已经成立18年。论坛应时代潮流而生，伴中非合作而兴，不断走向成熟和完善，成为国际对非合作和南南合作的一面旗帜。北京峰会成功举行，推动中非全面战略合作伙伴关系站在新的历史起点上，开启了新的历史征程。我们要共同做实做强中非合作论坛，全面高效落实北京峰会成果，以实实在在的成果造福中非人民。
Eighteen years ago, the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation was established to answer the call of the times. Since then, it has grown strong and prospered as China-Africa cooperation continues to flourish. It has become a distinct symbol in international cooperation with Africa and in South-South cooperation. The success of the Beijing Summit marks a new historic starting point for the China-Africa comprehensive strategic and cooperative partnership. We are about to set out on a new journey in history. We need to work together to substantiate and strengthen FOCAC, and deliver on the outcomes of the Beijing Summit in full and in real earnest, so that China-Africa cooperation will bring tangible benefits to our peoples.
女士们、先生们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,
在北京峰会结束之际，我衷心感谢出席峰会的非洲国家领导人，他们不辞辛劳，积极建言献策，贡献经验和智慧，成就了本次峰会的圆满成功！
As the Beijing Summit comes to a conclusion, I wish to express my heartfelt thanks to African leaders attending the Summit. Their hard work, active contribution, valuable experience and great wisdom have all contributed to the great success of the Summit. 
我特别感谢拉马福萨总统两天来同我密切合作，共同主持这次峰会，感谢南非在担任论坛共同主席国期间所做的出色工作。我祝贺塞内加尔接任新一届论坛共同主席国，感谢萨勒总统为推动论坛发展表现出的热情
In particular, I wish to thank President Cyril Ramaphosa for working closely with me over the past two days to co-chair the Summit, and I thank South Africa for the excellent job it has done as co-chair of FOCAC. I congratulate Senegal on taking over as the new co-chair of FOCAC, and I thank President Macky Sall for his strong commitment to advancing the Forum in its development. 
我感谢来自中非双方的工商、文化、智库、媒体等各界朋友积极参与和支持本次峰会。感谢媒体朋友们，是你们向世界全面、及时传递峰会盛况和成果。希望你们继续关注中非合作论坛，支持中非关系发展。
My thanks also go to friends from the Chinese and African business and cultural communities as well as think tanks and the media for your active participation and support. To friends from the media, I thank you for your comprehensive and timely coverage of the Summit and its outcomes. I hope you will continue to follow the development of FOCAC and support China-Africa relations.
我相信，在我们共同努力下，在26亿多中非人民积极支持下，我们携手构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体的伟大事业一定会取得成功，中非关系的明天一定会更加美好！
I am convinced that with our concerted efforts and with the strong support of the over 2.6 billion Chinese and African people, we will meet our goal of building an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future. China-Africa relations will embrace even brighter prospects in the time to come.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.