47. 习近平在金砖国家领导人约翰内斯堡会晤大范围会议上的讲话
让美好愿景变为现实
——在金砖国家领导人约翰内斯堡会晤大范围会议上的讲话
（2018年7月26日，约翰内斯堡）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Turn Our Vision into a Reality 
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China 
At the Plenary Session of the BRICS Johannesburg Summit 
Johannesburg, 26 July 2018
尊敬的拉马福萨总统，
尊敬的特梅尔总统，
尊敬的普京总统，
尊敬的莫迪总理：
Your Excellency President Cyril Ramaphosa, 
Your Excellency President Michel Temer,
Your Excellency President Vladimir Putin, 
Your Excellency Prime Minister Narendra Modi,
首先，我要再次感谢拉马福萨总统和南非政府为这次会晤所作的热情周到安排。阔别5年之后，金砖国家领导人会晤再次走进非洲，是一件值得庆祝的事情。
Let me begin by thanking President Ramaphosa and the South African government for their warm hospitality and thoughtful arrangements. The BRICS Summit is convened in Africa again after a lapse of five years. This is an occasion to celebrate.
这次会晤的主题是“金砖国家在非洲：在第四次工业革命中共谋包容增长和共同繁荣”，很有现实意义。从18世纪第一次工业革命的机械化，到19世纪第二次工业革命的电气化，再到20世纪第三次工业革命的信息化，一次次颠覆性的科技革新，带来社会生产力的大解放和生活水平的大跃升，从根本上改变了人类历史的发展轨迹。
The theme of this summit - "BRICS in Africa: Collaborating for Inclusive Growth and Shared Prosperity in the 4th Industrial Revolution" - is most fitting under the current circumstances. The previous three industrial revolutions were all characterized by transformative advancement in science and technology: the rise of mechanization in the 18th century, the harnessing of electricity in the 19th century, and the advent of the Information Age in the 20th century. Such breakthroughs have greatly unleashed social productivity and significantly improved people's living standards, thus profoundly reshaping the course of human history.
如今，我们正在经历一场更大范围、更深层次的科技革命和产业变革。大数据、人工智能等前沿技术不断取得突破，新技术、新业态、新产业层出不穷。各国利益和命运紧密相连，深度交融。同时，世界经济新旧动能转换尚未完成，南北失衡等深层次、结构性问题还未消除。地缘政治冲突此起彼伏，保护主义和单边主义愈演愈烈，直接影响到新兴市场国家和发展中国家发展外部环境。
Today, we are experiencing another revolution in science, technology and industry, which is greater in scope and depth. Breakthroughs are being made in quick succession in frontier technologies like big data and artificial intelligence. New technologies, business models and industries are emerging one after another. Countries around the world have found their interests and future tied together like never before.
That said, we have yet to sustain global growth with new driving forces and to address the North-South imbalance and other deep-seated structural problems. What's more, constant flare-ups of geopolitical conflicts and the escalation of protectionism and unilateralism are directly affecting the external development environment of emerging markets and developing countries.
时代大潮奔腾不息，不以任何人的意志为转移。金砖国家要把握历史大势，深化战略伙伴关系，巩固“三轮驱动”合作架构，让第二个“金色十年”的美好愿景变为现实，携手迈向人类命运共同体。
History keeps surging forward independent of people's wish. We the BRICS countries must therefore have a keen grasp of the trend of our times, deepen our strategic partnership, and consolidate our cooperation framework underpinned by economic, political and security cooperation and people-to-people exchanges. This way, we will be able to turn our vision of a second "Golden Decade" into a reality, and together build a community with a shared future for mankind.
第一，释放经济合作巨大潜力。加强经济合作、实现共同发展是金砖合作的初衷和主线，也是潜力最大、内容最丰富、成果最集中的领域。我们要加强贸易投资、财金、互联互通等领域合作，把合作蛋糕做大做实。要在联合国、二十国集团、世界贸易组织等框架内，坚定维护基于规则的多边贸易体制，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，旗帜鲜明反对保护主义。
First, we must unlock the enormous potential of our economic cooperation. Closer economic cooperation for shared prosperity is the original purpose and priority of BRICS cooperation. It is also in the economic field that we enjoy the most promising, diverse and fruitful cooperation. We need to step up trade, investment, economic, financial, and connectivity cooperation to make this pie still bigger. At the same time, we must work together at the United Nations, the Group of 20, and the World Trade Organization to safeguard the rule-based multilateral trading regime, promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, and reject protectionism outright.
我们要坚持创新引领，通过建设新工业革命伙伴关系，加强宏观经济政策协调，实现发展战略深度对接，在相互砥砺中加速新旧动能转换和经济结构转型升级。下阶段，中方将实施10期人力资源开发合作项目，邀请五国专家共同规划新工业革命合作蓝图，提升金砖国家及广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家竞争力。
It is important that we continue to pursue innovation-driven development and build a Partnership on New Industrial Revolution to strengthen coordination on macroeconomic policies, find more complementarities in our development strategies, and reinforce each other's efforts in renewing economic driving forces and upgrading economic structure. In this context, China will host ten human resources development programs during which experts of our five countries will be invited to draw up a blueprint for our cooperation in the new industrial revolution. By so doing, we hope to enhance the competitiveness of not only BRICS countries but also other emerging markets and developing countries.
第二，坚定维护国际和平安全。政治安全合作是金砖战略伙伴关系的重要内容。我们要继续高举多边主义旗帜，维护联合国宪章宗旨和原则，敦促各方遵守国际法和国际关系基本准则，以对话解争端，以协商化分歧。要充分发挥外长会晤、安全事务高级代表会议、常驻联合国代表会晤等机制作用，发出金砖声音，提出金砖方案，共同构建相互尊重、公平正义、合作共赢的新型国际关系。
Second, we must safeguard global peace and security. Political and security cooperation is an important component of BRICS strategic partnership. We should stay committed to multilateralism and to the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. We should call on all parties to abide by international law and basic norms governing international relations and to settle disputes through dialogue and differences through consultation. By fully leveraging the role of BRICS meetings of foreign ministers, national security advisers and permanent representatives to the United Nations, we can make our voice heard, put forth our solutions, and jointly work for a new type of international relations featuring mutual respect, equality, justice and win-win cooperation.
第三，深入拓展人文交流合作。金砖五国孕育出各自灿烂文明，彼此交相辉映，人文交流合作大有可为。去年和今年，金砖人文交流明显提速。我们要继续以民心相通为宗旨，广泛开展文化、教育、卫生、体育、旅游等各领域人文大交流，筑牢金砖合作民意基础。中方建议举行金砖博物馆、美术馆、图书馆联盟联合巡展等活动，加强文化创意产业、旅游、地方城市等领域合作，讲述更多精彩动人的金砖故事，不断增进五国人民相互了解和传统友谊。
Third, we must expand people-to-people exchanges. We the BRICS countries boast great civilizations. When it comes to cultural and people-to-people exchanges, there is a lot we can do together. As a matter of fact, such exchanges have notably gained momentum over the last year or two. We should aim at greater people-to-people connectivity and more popular support for BRICS cooperation through extensive exchanges in cultural, educational, health, sports, tourism and other areas. China would therefore like to suggest joint touring exhibitions by the BRICS alliances of museums, art museums, national galleries, and libraries and closer cooperation in the cultural, creative and tourism industries and at the sub-national level. This way, we can spread the BRICS story far and wide to further enhance the mutual understanding and traditional friendship among our people.
第四，构建紧密伙伴关系网络。金砖机制成立伊始，我们就共同确定了走开放包容之路的正确方向。厦门会晤更确立了“金砖+”合作理念，其要义是在不断强化五国团结协作内核，提升金砖向心力、凝聚力的同时，持续扩大金砖“朋友圈”，同广大新兴市场国家和发展中国家实现共同发展繁荣。我们要在联合国、二十国集团等框架内拓展“金砖+”合作，扩大新兴市场国家和发展中国家共同利益和发展空间，推动构建广泛伙伴关系，为世界和平与发展作出更大贡献。
Fourth, we must build a network of closer partnerships. Since the inception of the BRICS mechanism, openness and inclusiveness have remained our abiding commitment. The "BRICS Plus" approach we adopted at the Xiamen Summit is designed to strengthen the unity and coordination among BRICS members for greater cohesion and, at the same time, to keep broadening the BRICS "circle of friends" in a joint pursuit of shared development and prosperity for all emerging markets and developing countries. We may explore "BRICS Plus" cooperation within the United Nations, the G20, and other frameworks to advance the common interests and boost the development space for emerging markets and developing countries, thus contributing more to world peace and development through broader partnerships.
各位同事！
Colleagues,
金砖的未来掌握在五国人民自己手中。让我们同国际社会一道，共同建设一个持久和平、普遍安全、共同繁荣、开放包容、清洁美丽的世界。
The future of BRICS is in the hands of our people. Let us work together with the rest of the international community for an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace, universal security and common prosperity.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.