51. 习近平在塞内加尔媒体发表署名文章《中国和塞内加尔团结一致》
中国和塞内加尔团结一致
中华人民共和国主席 
习近平
SUNU JAPPO, China and Senegal! 
Xi Jinping 
President of the People's Republic of China
提起塞内加尔，人们马上会想到非洲足坛劲旅“特兰加雄狮”队，有世界最艰苦比赛之称的达喀尔汽车拉力赛。这里还是历史悠久、名人辈出的文化之邦。贵国开国总统桑戈尔就是著名诗人和作家，他1974年访华时，同毛泽东主席讨论过诗词，他的著作积极倡导“黑人传统精神”，提升了塞内加尔和非洲人民的民族自豪感和自信心。
When talking about Senegal, the Lions of Teranga, its national football team and one of the best in Africa, and the Dakar Rally, the world's toughest rally, are the first things that come to people's mind. Senegal is also a country with a time-honored history and rich culture and home to many famous names. Leopold Sedar Senghor, the founding President, was a renowned poet and writer. During his visit to China in 1974, he had a conversation with Chairman Mao Zedong about poem. His works, which champion Negritude, have inspired the people of Senegal and Africa with a strong sense of national pride and confidence.
近年来，在萨勒总统领导下，塞内加尔成为发展热土，正向“振兴塞内加尔计划”提出的宏伟目标迈进。我很高兴应萨勒总统邀请对塞内加尔进行国事访问。我期待通过这次访问，加深了解，增进友谊，深化合作，推动中塞关系得到更大发展。
In recent years, under the leadership of President Macky Sall, Senegal has become a land of robust growth, striding proudly toward the ambitious goals set out in the Plan for an Emerging Senegal. I am looking forward to my upcoming state visit to the country at the invitation of President Sall, an opportunity to enhance our mutual understanding and friendship, deepen cooperation and advance China-Senegal relations.
中塞关系已经走过47个年头，其间，有过波折，走过弯路，但双方相互支持、友好合作是主流，两国人民的心始终相连。2005年中塞复交后，两国关系翻开新的一页。中方支持塞方走适合本国国情的发展道路，塞方在涉及中国核心利益问题上给予中方坚定支持。两国政治互信水平不断提升，互利合作成果实实在在，在重大国际和地区问题上保持密切协调。中塞关系实现了从长期友好合作伙伴关系到全面战略合作伙伴关系的跨越。
China-Senegal relations have traversed a journey of 47 years. Over the years, despite the ups and downs or even setbacks at times, the relationship is overwhelmingly defined by mutual support, friendly cooperation and affinity between our peoples. The restoration of diplomatic ties in 2005 opened up a new chapter in China-Senegal relations. China supports Senegal in choosing a development path in line with its national conditions and Senegal firmly supports China on issues concerning China's core interests. Our two countries now enjoy enhanced political mutual trust, fruitful practical cooperation that benefits both countries and close coordination on major international and regional issues. China-Senegal relationship has been elevated from a long-term friendly cooperative partnership to a comprehensive strategic partnership.
现在，中国是塞内加尔第二大贸易伙伴、第一大花生进口国，双边贸易额10余年间扩大了16倍。中国是塞内加尔第一大融资来源国，由中国融资建设的方久尼大桥、捷斯－图巴高速公路等项目将有力促进塞内加尔经济发展。中方提供融资实施的乡村打井工程将建设251口水井和1800公里管线，解决塞内加尔七分之一人口的吃水用水问题，中方援建的国家大剧院、黑人文明博物馆、竞技摔跤场等为传承和发扬塞内加尔文化传统作出了重要贡献。
Today, China is Senegal's second largest trading partner and the top importer of Senegalese peanuts. Our trade volume grew by 16 times in just over a decade. China is also Senegal's biggest source of financing. The many China-funded projects, including the Foundiougne bridge and the Thies-Touba highway, will strongly boost Senegal's economic growth. The rural water supply project that includes 251 wells and 1800-kilometer pipelines funded by China will benefit one seventh of Senegal's population. The National Grand Theater, the Museum of Black Civilization and the National Wrestling Arena, built with Chinese assistance, stand as important venues to carry forward the culture and traditions of Senegal.
“路遥知马力，日久见人心。”当年，桑戈尔总统看到中国援助塞内加尔的农业专家同当地人民一样劳动、一样满手泥巴，非常感动。今天，中国专家仍在田间地头，同塞内加尔兄弟姐妹一起切磋水稻和蔬菜种植技术。友谊在两国人民心中扎下了根。2013年，65岁的塞内加尔老人比拉马参加“感知中国”知识竞赛。他从全球25万名参赛者中脱颖而出，获得了最高奖，并被邀请到中国旅游，实现了多年的访华夙愿。现在，每年有近800名塞内加尔留学生在中国学习，往来两国经商、旅游人数以20%以上的速度递增。每一通电话、每一封邮件、每一次握手都会多一分相知，人民友谊的涓涓细流正汇成江河海洋。
A Chinese proverb has it that, "Just as distance tests a horse's strength, time will reveal a person's sincerity." Decades ago, President Senghor was deeply touched when he saw Chinese agricultural experts toiling in the field side by side with local Senegalese, mud on their hands. Today, Chinese experts are still out there, working with their Senegalese brothers and sisters on rice and vegetable farming technologies. That's how friendship has taken deep roots in the hearts of our two peoples. In 2013, Birama Diadji TOURE, a 65-year-old Senegalese, took part in the Experience China knowledge contest and emerged winning the top prize out of 250,000 contestants from all over the world. Birama was later invited to visit China, fulfilling his long-cherished dream. Right now, some 800 Senegalese students are studying in China. The number of business and tourist travels between the two countries have been increasing by over 20% annually. With every telephone call, every email and every handshake, our mutual understanding goes deeper and the bond of friendship becomes stronger.
有句沃洛夫谚语说，“每个人都是他人的慰藉”。这同中国人常说的“我为人人，人人为我”是同样的意思。中国同包括塞内加尔在内的广大非洲国家从来都是休戚与共的命运共同体，有着相同的历史遭遇，面临共同的发展任务，怀揣对美好生活的共同追求。我们应该携起手来构建更加紧密的中非命运共同体，实现共同发展、共同繁荣。
"Nit, nit ay garabam (Man is the remedy of man)", says a Wolof proverb. Similarly, there is a Chinese saying to the effect of "one for all, all for one". Having gone through thick and thin together, China, Senegal and the vast African countries are bound by similar historical experience, same development tasks and shared aspiration for a better life. To achieve common development and prosperity, we need to join hands to build an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future.
我在2013年提出共建“一带一路”倡议，目的是促进基础设施建设和互联互通，对接各国发展战略，实现共同发展。包括塞内加尔在内的许多非洲国家高度认同“一带一路”合作理念，愿积极参与“一带一路”建设。今年9月，中非合作论坛北京峰会将隆重召开。这次会议将把共建“一带一路”倡议、联合国2030年可持续发展议程、非盟《2063年议程》以及非洲各国发展战略结合起来，为中非合作开辟新天地。我们愿以此为契机，推动中塞关系实现更大发展。
In 2013, I put forward the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a pathway to common development through improved infrastructure and connectivity and greater synergy of development strategies. It has been warmly welcomed by Senegal and many other African countries, who have since shown great interest in joining the BRI cooperation. This September, a Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) will be held in Beijing. By bringing together the BRI, the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Agenda 2063 of the African Union and African countries' national development plans, the summit will break new grounds for China-Africa cooperation. It also presents us with an opportunity to elevate China-Senegal relations to a higher level.
——我们要坚持平等互信。双方要从长远角度把握两国关系，在事关对方核心利益和重大关切问题上坚定相互支持，做真诚相待、互信互助的好朋友、好伙伴。
We need to uphold equality and mutual trust. As good friends and partners who trust and help each other with sincerity, China and Senegal need to adopt a long-term approach in growing our bilateral relationship and firmly support each other on issues of core interests and major concern.
——我们要加强战略对接。塞内加尔处在经济发展的重要阶段。中国正在推动经济实现高质量发展。中方愿同塞方加强治国理政经验交流，分享中国改革开放40年来在工业发展、乡村振兴、脱贫攻坚等领域的成功经验，促进两国实现更好发展。
We need to foster greater synergy between our strategies. Senegal's economy is at a crucial juncture. And China is seeking high-quality development. As such, China stands ready to increase exchange on governance with Senegal and share China's experience from four decades of reform and opening up, including industrial development, rural vitalization and poverty alleviation, which will be beneficial to both of our countries.
——我们要深化务实合作。中方愿以共建“一带一路”倡议为牵引，以中非合作论坛为平台，同塞方发挥优势互补，重点加强农渔产品贸易加工、基础设施建设、产能、工业园区、人力资源开发等领域合作，帮助塞方提高自主发展能力。中方愿在科学规划、经济可行、循序渐进基础上，同塞方加强沟通和合作，确保融资可持续。
We need to deepen practical cooperation. Leveraging the BRI and the platform of FOCAC, China will work with Senegal to tap our respective strengths in the trade and processing of agricultural and aquatic products, infrastructure, production capacity, industrial parks and human resources development, all of which are important for Senegal's capability to achieve home-grown development. China also wishes to have closer discussions and cooperation with Senegal to see to it that financing arrangements are based on sound planning, economically feasible and done in a step-by-step manner, thus ensuring their sustainability.
——我们要扩大民心相通。双方要继续加强教育科研机构、文艺团体、新闻传媒、青年组织友好交流，让双方合作快车跑得更稳更远。
We need to strengthen people-to-people ties. It's important to further friendly exchange between our education and research institutions, cultural and art groups, media and youth organizations so that the express train of China-Senegal cooperation will speed ahead smoothly.
——我们要加强国际和地区事务合作。中方愿同塞方就联合国事务、维护多边贸易体制、气候变化、非洲和平与发展等重大议题加强沟通和协调，愿同塞方加强在中非合作论坛框架内合作，促进论坛机制和中非关系实现更大发展。
We need to enhance cooperation on regional and international affairs. China will step up communication and coordination with Senegal on major issues relating to the UN, upholding the multilateral trading regime, climate change and peace and development of Africa. We also look forward to working with Senegal under FOCAC to strengthen mechanisms of the forum and more broadly, the relationship between China and African countries.
中塞人民梦想相通，命运相连。让我们共同努力，推动中塞合作沿着互利共赢道路不断前进！中国和塞内加尔团结一致！
Similar dreams and shared destiny have brought the Chinese and Senegalese people together. It is thus our shared mission to join hands and bring our mutually beneficial cooperation to greater fruition. Sunu Jappo, China and Senegal!