59. 习近平在亚太经合组织第二十五次领导人非正式会议第一阶段会议上的讲话
携手谱写亚太合作共赢新篇章
——在亚太经合组织第二十五次领导人非正式会议第一阶段会议上的发言
（2017年11月11日，岘港）
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Working Together for a New Chapter of
Win-Win Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Session I of the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting
Da Nang, 11 November 2017
尊敬的陈大光主席，
各位同事：	
President Tran Dai Quang,
Dear Colleagues,
感谢陈大光主席和越南政府为本次会议所作的周到安排。几天前，台风“达维”登陆越南，造成重大人员伤亡和财产损失。我谨代表中国政府和人民向灾区人民致以诚挚慰问。I wish to thank President Tran Dai Quang and the Vietnamese government for their thoughtful arrangements. Vietnam was hit by Typhoon Damrey a few days ago, resulting in heavy casualties and economic losses. On behalf of the Chinese government and people, let me express my deep sympathy to those affected by the typhoon.
3年前的今天，我们在北京共商亚太合作大计。中国人常说，3年有成。3年来，世界经济逐步回暖，已呈现出国际金融危机发生以来较强的复苏势头，各方信心正在增强。Three years ago on this day, we discussed in Beijing the blueprint for Asia-Pacific cooperation. The Chinese people believe that three years is a good time to take stock of what one has achieved. In the past three years, the world economy has gradually rebounded, showing strong momentum of recovery since the outbreak of the international financial crisis. People in all sectors are gaining more confidence.
察势者智，驭势者赢。我们要看到世界经济正在发生深层次重大变化。昨天，我在工商领导人峰会演讲中谈了看法。亚太各方应该因势利导，立足于行动，引领全球新一轮发展繁荣。	
Those who recognize the trend are wise and those who ride the trend will win. We need to take note of the profound changes taking place in the world economy. At yesterday's CEO Summit, I shared my thoughts on this subject. If Asia-Pacific economies seize the trend and take action, we can usher in a new round of development and prosperity for the world.
第一，坚持不懈推动创新，打造强劲发展动力。创新是撬动发展的第一杠杆。当前，新兴科技和产业革命加速兴起，创新发展面临难得历史机遇。我们要推动科技创新和制度创新两个轮子一起转，市场和技术和谐共振，让新技术、新业态、新模式不断开花结果，最大限度释放发展潜能。我们要用好亚太经合组织平台，深入落实今年制定的互联网和数字经济路线图。	First, we need to promote innovation as a strong growth driver. Innovation is the most powerful lever for development. As new technologies emerge and the new industrial revolution gains momentum, we face a rare historic opportunity for innovation-driven development. We need to strive for both scientific and technological innovation and institutional innovation, build synergy between market and technology, and help bring to fruition new technologies, new business forms and models to fully unlock our development potential. This is why, in the context of APEC, we need to implement in real earnest the Roadmap on the Internet and Digital Economy we have drawn this year.
这些年，中国经济不断呈现新动能，关键就在于坚持走创新发展之路。30年前，中国第一封电子邮件从北京发出。目前，中国已拥有7.5亿网民，网络零售额年均增长30%，共享经济规模达3.5万亿元人民币，移动支付规模超过158万亿元人民币。事实证明，只要勇于探索，创新发展的道路就会越走越宽。	
Innovation has proven to be essential to the emergence of new drivers for the Chinese economy in recent years. Thirty years ago, China's first email was sent from Beijing. Today, China has 750 million Internet users, our on-line retail sales are growing by 30 percent a year, our "sharing economy" has reached 3.5 trillion yuan in size, and China's mobile payment transactions have exceeded 158 trillion yuan. This example shows that as long as we keep exploring, we will see more opportunities and successes of innovation-driven development.
第二，坚定不移扩大开放，创造广阔发展空间。历史告诉我们，关起门来搞建设不会成功，开放发展才是正途。我们应该不忘初心，深入推进贸易和投资自由化便利化，构建开放型经济，维护和加强多边贸易体制，引导经济全球化再平衡。要按照商定的路线图，坚定推进亚太自由贸易区建设，在开放中实现亚太新一轮大发展。	
Second, we need to open up our economies to create more space for development. History has taught us that closed-door development will get nowhere, while open development is the only right choice. We need to remain true to APEC's founding purpose: advance trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, build an open economy, uphold and strengthen the multilateral trading regime, and help rebalance economic globalization. We need to take determined steps toward a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific in line with the agreed roadmap, and herald a new round of development in the Asia-Pacific in the course of opening up.
明年是中国改革开放40周年。近40年来，中国坚持对外开放，在走向世界的过程中实现了自身跨越式发展。展望未来，中国开放的力度将更大，惠及世界的程度会更深。从明年起，我们将举办中国国际进口博览会，打造互利合作新平台。我相信，这将有利于各方更好分享中国发展红利。	
Next year will mark the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. In nearly four decades, China has opened its arms to embrace the world and achieved "leapfrog development" of itself in this process. Looking ahead, China will open still wider and its development will deliver even greater benefits to the rest of the world. Starting from next year, China will hold an International Import Expo. I am sure this new platform of mutually beneficial cooperation will help all parties to better share the opportunities of China's development.
第三，积极践行包容性发展，让民众有更多获得感。包容性不足是一个具有普遍性的问题。我们要把提升包容性置于更突出位置，处理好公平和效率、资本和劳动、技术和就业的关系，重视人工智能等新技术对就业的影响，让更多人共享发展成果。我们要落实好今年制定的包容行动议程文件，深化减贫、中小微企业、教育、反腐败、城镇化、妇女等领域合作，增进28亿亚太人民的福祉。	
Third, we need to pursue inclusive development to enhance our people's sense of fulfillment. Lack of inclusiveness in development is a problem facing many economies. We should redouble efforts to address this problem. To enable more people to share the benefits of development, efforts must be made to strike a better balance between fairness and efficiency, capital and labor, technology and employment. Greater attention must be paid to the impact of artificial intelligence and other technological advances on jobs. APEC members need to do a good job of implementing the Action Agenda on Inclusion formulated this year, and deepen cooperation on poverty reduction, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), education, fighting corruption, urbanization and women's empowerment. All this will contribute to the well-being of the 2.8 billion people in the Asia-Pacific region.
中国始终坚持就业优先，着力增强经济发展创造就业的能力，以创业带动就业，保障高校毕业生等重点群体就业，以教育培训提升劳动力素质，缓解结构性就业矛盾。过去几年，中国每年都实现了1300万以上城镇新增就业。我们得到的一点重要启示是，只要加强统筹，举措到位，就业不是经济结构调整必然付出的代价，稳住就业反而能够为改革发展提供充足的回旋空间。	
China gives high priority to employment. We have worked to ensure that economic development is pursued in a way that supports job creation, encouraged business start-ups as a means to create more jobs, and paid particular attention to the employment of college graduates and other key groups. We have also provided the labor force with better education and training to tackle structural unemployment. In each of the past few years, we have created over 13 million new jobs in cities and towns. An important thing we have learnt from all this is that with better coordination and the right measures, economic restructuring does not have to come at the expense of employment. On the contrary, stable employment would allow greater leeway for reform and development.
第四，不断丰富伙伴关系内涵，实现互利共赢。我们同属亚太，彼此息息相关，命运相连。要强化命运共同体意识，加强政策协调对接，形成合力。要秉持和而不同理念，促进优势互补、合作互惠、发展互鉴。要兼顾自身利益和他方利益，减少政策负面外溢效应。我们已经确定了亚太伙伴关系的方向和构架，要扎扎实实向前推进。	
Fourth, we need to enrich our partnerships and deliver benefits to all involved. As APEC economies, we have a stake in each other's success and our future is closely connected. With a shared future in mind, we need to develop a stronger sense of community, harmonize our policies and create synergy. We need to foster a spirit of harmony in diversity, draw on each other's strength, pursue mutually beneficial cooperation and draw on each other's best practice in development. We should consider the interests of others while pursuing those of our own, and reduce the adverse spillovers of our domestic policies. As we have agreed on the direction and framework of an Asia-Pacific partnership, it is time to take solid steps toward this goal.
基于共商共建共享理念，中方提出并积极推进共建“一带一路”倡议，得到各方热烈响应和支持。今年5月，“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛在北京成功举行，取得丰硕成果，推动共建“一带一路”进入全面实施的新阶段。中方愿以此为契机，同亚太伙伴深化政策沟通、设施联通、贸易畅通、资金融通、民心相通，实现协同联动发展，朝着命运共同体方向迈进。	
China has put forward the Belt and Road Initiative and is pursuing it in a spirit of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits. This initiative is well received and supported by various parties. The successful and fruitful Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation held in Beijing in May marked a new stage of full implementation. Going forward, China will deepen policy, infrastructure, trade, financial and people-to-people connectivity with our Asia-Pacific partners, seek interconnected development and move toward a community of shared future.
各位同事！	
Dear Colleagues,
大家都很关注中国的未来发展。上个月，中国共产党第十九次全国代表大会成功举行。我们立足于中国特色社会主义进入新时代的历史方位，着眼于实现社会主义现代化和中华民族伟大复兴的总任务，制定了未来一个时期的基本方略和发展蓝图。我们将坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，着力解决好发展不平衡不充分的问题，大力提升发展质量和效益，更好满足人民在经济、政治、文化、社会、生态等方面日益增长的需要，更好推动人的全面发展、社会全面进步。我们将深入贯彻新发展理念，全面深化改革，加快建设创新型国家，推动形成全面开放新格局，建设现代化经济体系。	
You may all have an interest in China's future development. Last month's 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China was a great success. We laid out our development strategy and blueprint for the coming decades, keeping in mind that socialism with Chinese characteristics has entered a new era whose overriding goal is socialist modernization and national rejuvenation. We will continue to be guided by a philosophy of people-oriented development, resolve the issue of unbalanced and inadequate development and raise the quality and efficiency of growth to better meet our people's ever-growing needs for economic, political, cultural, social and ecological progress, promote all-round development of our people and facilitate social progress across the board. We will act on the new vision of development, comprehensively deepen reform, turn China into an innovation-driven country at a faster pace, break new ground in pursuing opening-up on all fronts and build a modern economic system.
我相信，一个发展动力更足、人民获得感更强、同世界互动更深入的中国，必将为亚太和世界创造更多机遇，作出更大贡献。	I am convinced that a China that enjoys stronger growth and interacts more with the world and whose people have a greater sense of fulfillment will surely bring more opportunities and make greater contributions to the Asia-Pacific and the world at large.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.