68. 习近平在“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的演讲
携手推进“一带一路”建设
——在“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛开幕式上的演讲
（2017年5月14日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　
习近平
Work Together to Build the Silk Road Economic Belt and The 21st Century Maritime Silk Road
Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Opening Ceremony of
The Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation
14 May 2017
尊敬的各位国家元首，政府首脑，
各位国际组织负责人，
女士们，先生们，
朋友们：	
Distinguished Heads of State and Government,
Heads of International Organizations,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
“孟夏之日，万物并秀。”在这美好时节，来自100多个国家的各界嘉宾齐聚北京，共商“一带一路”建设合作大计，具有十分重要的意义。今天，群贤毕至，少长咸集，我期待着大家集思广益、畅所欲言，为推动“一带一路”建设献计献策，让这一世纪工程造福各国人民。	
In this lovely season of early Summer when every living thing is full of energy, I wish to welcome all of you, distinguished guests representing over 100 countries, to attend this important forum on the Belt and Road Initiative held in Beijing. This is indeed a gathering of great minds. In the coming two days, I hope that by engaging in full exchanges of views, we will contribute to pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, a project of the century, so that it will benefit people across the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
2000多年前，我们的先辈筚路蓝缕，穿越草原沙漠，开辟出联通亚欧非的陆上丝绸之路；我们的先辈扬帆远航，穿越惊涛骇浪，闯荡出连接东西方的海上丝绸之路。古丝绸之路打开了各国友好交往的新窗口，书写了人类发展进步的新篇章。中国陕西历史博物馆珍藏的千年“鎏金铜蚕”，在印度尼西亚发现的千年沉船“黑石号”等，见证了这段历史。	
Over 2,000 years ago, our ancestors, trekking across vast steppes and deserts, opened the transcontinental passage connecting Asia, Europe and Africa, known today as the Silk Road. Our ancestors, navigating rough seas, created sea routes linking the East with the West, namely, the maritime Silk Road. These ancient silk routes opened windows of friendly engagement among nations, adding a splendid chapter to the history of human progress. The thousand-year-old "gilt bronze silkworm" displayed at China's Shaanxi History Museum and the Belitung shipwreck discovered in Indonesia bear witness to this exciting period of history.
古丝绸之路绵亘万里，延续千年，积淀了以和平合作、开放包容、互学互鉴、互利共赢为核心的丝路精神。这是人类文明的宝贵遗产。	
Spanning thousands of miles and years, the ancient silk routes embody the spirit of peace and cooperation, openness and inclusiveness, mutual learning and mutual benefit. The Silk Road spirit has become a great heritage of human civilization.
——和平合作。公元前140多年的中国汉代，一支从长安出发的和平使团，开始打通东方通往西方的道路，完成了“凿空之旅”，这就是著名的张骞出使西域。中国唐宋元时期，陆上和海上丝绸之路同步发展，中国、意大利、摩洛哥的旅行家杜环、马可·波罗、伊本·白图泰都在陆上和海上丝绸之路留下了历史印记。15世纪初的明代，中国著名航海家郑和七次远洋航海，留下千古佳话。这些开拓事业之所以名垂青史，是因为使用的不是战马和长矛，而是驼队和善意；依靠的不是坚船和利炮，而是宝船和友谊。一代又一代“丝路人”架起了东西方合作的纽带、和平的桥梁。	
-- Peace and cooperation. In China's Han Dynasty around 140 B.C., Zhang Qian, a royal emissary, left Chang'an, capital of the Han Dynasty. He traveled westward on a mission of peace and opened an overland route linking the East and the West, a daring undertaking which came to be known as Zhang Qian's journey to the Western regions. Centuries later, in the years of Tang, Song and Yuan Dynasties, such silk routes, both over land and at sea, boomed. Great adventurers, including Du Huan of China, Marco Polo of Italy and ibn Batutah of Morocco, left their footprints along these ancient routes. In the early 15th century, Zheng He, the famous Chinese navigator in the Ming Dynasty, made seven voyages to the Western Seas, a feat which still is remembered today. These pioneers won their place in history not as conquerors with warships, guns or swords. Rather, they are remembered as friendly emissaries leading camel caravans and sailing treasure-loaded ships. Generation after generation, the silk routes travelers have built a bridge for peace and East-West cooperation.
——开放包容。古丝绸之路跨越尼罗河流域、底格里斯河和幼发拉底河流域、印度河和恒河流域、黄河和长江流域，跨越埃及文明、巴比伦文明、印度文明、中华文明的发祥地，跨越佛教、基督教、伊斯兰教信众的汇集地，跨越不同国度和肤色人民的聚居地。不同文明、宗教、种族求同存异、开放包容，并肩书写相互尊重的壮丽诗篇，携手绘就共同发展的美好画卷。酒泉、敦煌、吐鲁番、喀什、撒马尔罕、巴格达、君士坦丁堡等古城，宁波、泉州、广州、北海、科伦坡、吉达、亚历山大等地的古港，就是记载这段历史的“活化石”。历史告诉我们：文明在开放中发展，民族在融合中共存。	
-- Openness and inclusiveness. The ancient silk routes spanned the valleys of the Nile, the Tigris and Euphrates, the Indus and Ganges and the Yellow and Yangtze Rivers. They connected the birthplaces of the Egyptian, Babylonian, Indian and Chinese civilizations as well as the lands of Buddhism, Christianity and Islam and homes of people of different nationalities and races. These routes enabled people of various civilizations, religions and races to interact with and embrace each other with open mind. In the course of exchange, they fostered a spirit of mutual respect and were engaged in a common endeavor to pursue prosperity. Today, ancient cities of Jiuquan, Dunhuang, Tulufan, Kashi, Samarkand, Baghdad and Constantinople as well as ancient ports of Ningbo, Quanzhou, Guangzhou, Beihai, Colombo, Jeddah and Alexandria stand as living monuments to these past interactions. This part of history shows that civilization thrives with openness and nations prosper through exchange.
——互学互鉴。古丝绸之路不仅是一条通商易货之道，更是一条知识交流之路。沿着古丝绸之路，中国将丝绸、瓷器、漆器、铁器传到西方，也为中国带来了胡椒、亚麻、香料、葡萄、石榴。沿着古丝绸之路，佛教、伊斯兰教及阿拉伯的天文、历法、医药传入中国，中国的四大发明、养蚕技术也由此传向世界。更为重要的是，商品和知识交流带来了观念创新。比如，佛教源自印度，在中国发扬光大，在东南亚得到传承。儒家文化起源中国，受到欧洲莱布尼茨、伏尔泰等思想家的推崇。这是交流的魅力、互鉴的成果。	
-- Mutual learning. The ancient silk routes were not for trade only, they boosted flow of knowledge as well. Through these routes, Chinese silk, porcelain, lacquerwork and ironware were shipped to the West, while pepper, flax, spices, grape and pomegranate entered China. Through these routes, Buddhism, Islam and Arab astronomy, calendar and medicine found their way to China, while China's four great inventions and silkworm breeding spread to other parts of the world. More importantly, the exchange of goods and know-how spurred new ideas. For example, Buddhism originated in India, blossomed in China and was enriched in Southeast Asia. Confucianism, which was born in China, gained appreciation by European thinkers such as Leibniz and Voltaire. Herein lies the appeal of mutual learning.
——互利共赢。古丝绸之路见证了陆上“使者相望于道，商旅不绝于途”的盛况，也见证了海上“舶交海中，不知其数”的繁华。在这条大动脉上，资金、技术、人员等生产要素自由流动，商品、资源、成果等实现共享。阿拉木图、撒马尔罕、长安等重镇和苏尔港、广州等良港兴旺发达，罗马、安息、贵霜等古国欣欣向荣，中国汉唐迎来盛世。古丝绸之路创造了地区大发展大繁荣。	
-- Mutual benefit. The ancient silk routes witnessed the bustling scenes of visits and trade over land and ships calling at ports. Along these major arteries of interaction, capital, technology and people flowed freely, and goods, resources and benefits were widely shared. The ancient prosperous cities of Alma-Ata, Samarkand and Chang'an and ports of Sur and Guangzhou thrived, so did the Roman Empire as well as Parthia and Kushan Kingdoms. The Han and Tang Dynasties of China entered the golden age. The ancient silk routes brought prosperity to these regions and boosted their development.
历史是最好的老师。这段历史表明，无论相隔多远，只要我们勇敢迈出第一步，坚持相向而行，就能走出一条相遇相知、共同发展之路，走向幸福安宁和谐美好的远方。	
History is our best teacher. The glory of the ancient silk routes shows that geographical distance is not insurmountable. If we take the first courageous step towards each other, we can embark on a path leading to friendship, shared development, peace, harmony and a better future.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
从历史维度看，人类社会正处在一个大发展大变革大调整时代。世界多极化、经济全球化、社会信息化、文化多样化深入发展，和平发展的大势日益强劲，变革创新的步伐持续向前。各国之间的联系从来没有像今天这样紧密，世界人民对美好生活的向往从来没有像今天这样强烈，人类战胜困难的手段从来没有像今天这样丰富。	
From the historical perspective, humankind has reached an age of great progress, great transformation and profound changes. In this increasingly multi-polar, economically globalized, digitized and culturally diversified world, the trend toward peace and development becomes stronger, and reform and innovation are gaining momentum. Never have we seen such close interdependence among countries as today, such fervent desire of people for a better life, and never have we had so many means to prevail over difficulties.
从现实维度看，我们正处在一个挑战频发的世界。世界经济增长需要新动力，发展需要更加普惠平衡，贫富差距鸿沟有待弥合。地区热点持续动荡，恐怖主义蔓延肆虐。和平赤字、发展赤字、治理赤字，是摆在全人类面前的严峻挑战。这是我一直思考的问题。	
In terms of reality, we find ourselves in a world fraught with challenges. Global growth requires new drivers, development needs to be more inclusive and balanced, and the gap between the rich and the poor needs to be narrowed. Hotspots in some regions are causing instability and terrorism is rampant. Deficit in peace, development and governance poses a daunting challenge to mankind. This is the issue that has always been on my mind.
2013年秋天，我在哈萨克斯坦和印度尼西亚提出共建丝绸之路经济带和21世纪海上丝绸之路，即“一带一路”倡议。“桃李不言，下自成蹊。”4年来，全球100多个国家和国际组织积极支持和参与“一带一路”建设，联合国大会、联合国安理会等重要决议也纳入“一带一路”建设内容。“一带一路”建设逐渐从理念转化为行动，从愿景转变为现实，建设成果丰硕。	
In the autumn of 2013, respectively in Kazakhstan and Indonesia, I proposed the building of the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, which I call the Belt and Road Initiative. As a Chinese saying goes, "Peaches and plums do not speak, but they are so attractive that a path is formed below the trees." Four years on, over 100 countries and international organizations have supported and got involved in this initiative. Important resolutions passed by the UN General Assembly and Security Council contain reference to it. Thanks to our efforts, the vision of the Belt and Road Initiative is becoming a reality and bearing rich fruit.
——这是政策沟通不断深化的4年。我多次说过，“一带一路”建设不是另起炉灶、推倒重来，而是实现战略对接、优势互补。我们同有关国家协调政策，包括俄罗斯提出的欧亚经济联盟、东盟提出的互联互通总体规划、哈萨克斯坦提出的“光明之路”、土耳其提出的“中间走廊”、蒙古提出的“发展之路”、越南提出的“两廊一圈”、英国提出的“英格兰北方经济中心”、波兰提出的“琥珀之路”等。中国同老挝、柬埔寨、缅甸、匈牙利等国的规划对接工作也全面展开。中国同40多个国家和国际组织签署了合作协议，同30多个国家开展机制化产能合作。本次论坛期间，我们还将签署一批对接合作协议和行动计划，同60多个国家和国际组织共同发出推进“一带一路”贸易畅通合作倡议。各方通过政策对接，实现了“一加一大于二”的效果。	
-- These four years have seen deepened policy connectivity. I have said on many occasions that the pursuit of the Belt and Road Initiative is not meant to reinvent the wheel. Rather, it aims to complement the development strategies of countries involved by leveraging their comparative strengths. We have enhanced coordination with the policy initiatives of relevant countries, such as the Eurasian Economic Union of Russia, the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity, the Bright Road initiative of Kazakhstan, the Middle Corridor initiative of Turkey, the Development Road initiative of Mongolia, the Two Corridors, One Economic Circle initiative of Viet Nam, the Northern Powerhouse initiative of the UK and the Amber Road initiative of Poland. We are also promoting complementarity between China's development plan and those of Laos, Cambodia, Myanmar, Hungary and other countries. China has signed cooperation agreements with over 40 countries and international organizations and carried out framework cooperation on production capacity with more than 30 countries. During the forum, a number of cooperation agreements on policy connectivity and action plans will be signed. We will also launch Belt and Road cooperation initiative on trade connectivity together with some 60 countries and international organizations. Such policy connectivity will produce a multiplying effect on cooperation among the parties involved.
——这是设施联通不断加强的4年。“道路通，百业兴。”我们和相关国家一道共同加速推进雅万高铁、中老铁路、亚吉铁路、匈塞铁路等项目，建设瓜达尔港、比雷埃夫斯港等港口，规划实施一大批互联互通项目。目前，以中巴、中蒙俄、新亚欧大陆桥等经济走廊为引领，以陆海空通道和信息高速路为骨架，以铁路、港口、管网等重大工程为依托，一个复合型的基础设施网络正在形成。	
-- These four years have seen enhanced infrastructure connectivity. Building roads and railways creates prosperity in all sectors. We have accelerated the building of Jakarta-Bandung high-speed railway, China-Laos railway, Addis Ababa-Djibouti railway and Hungary-Serbia railway, and upgraded Gwadar and Piraeus ports in cooperation with relevant countries. A large number of connectivity projects are also in the pipeline. Today, a multi-dimensional infrastructure network is taking shape, one that is underpinned by economic corridors such as China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, China-Mongolia-Russia Economic Corridor and the New Eurasian Continental Bridge, featuring land-sea-air transportation routes and information expressway and supported by major railway, port and pipeline projects.
——这是贸易畅通不断提升的4年。中国同“一带一路”参与国大力推动贸易和投资便利化，不断改善营商环境。我了解到，仅哈萨克斯坦等中亚国家农产品到达中国市场的通关时间就缩短了90%。2014年至2016年，中国同“一带一路”沿线国家贸易总额超过3万亿美元。中国对“一带一路”沿线国家投资累计超过500亿美元。中国企业已经在20多个国家建设56个经贸合作区，为有关国家创造近11亿美元税收和18万个就业岗位。	
-- These four years have seen increased trade connectivity. China has worked with other countries involved in the Belt and Road Initiative to promote trade and investment facilitation and improve business environment. I was told that for Kazakhstan and other Central Asian countries alone, customs clearance time for agricultural produce exporting to China is cut by 90%. Total trade between China and other Belt and Road countries in 2014-2016 has exceeded US$3 trillion, and China's investment in these countries has surpassed US$50 billion. Chinese companies have set up 56 economic cooperation zones in over 20 countries, generating some US$1.1 billion of tax revenue and 180,000 jobs for them.
——这是资金融通不断扩大的4年。融资瓶颈是实现互联互通的突出挑战。中国同“一带一路”建设参与国和组织开展了多种形式的金融合作。亚洲基础设施投资银行已经为“一带一路”建设参与国的9个项目提供17亿美元贷款，“丝路基金”投资达40亿美元，中国同中东欧“16+1”金融控股公司正式成立。这些新型金融机制同世界银行等传统多边金融机构各有侧重、互为补充，形成层次清晰、初具规模的“一带一路”金融合作网络。	
-- These four years have seen expanded financial connectivity. Financing bottleneck is a key challenge to realizing connectivity. China has engaged in multiple forms of financial cooperation with countries and organizations involved in the Belt and Road Initiative. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank has provided US$1.7 billion of loans for 9 projects in Belt and Road participating countries. The Silk Road Fund has made US$4 billion of investment, and the 16+1 financial holding company between China and Central and Eastern European countries has been inaugurated. With distinctive focus, these new financial mechanisms and traditional multilateral financial institutions such as the World Bank complement each other. A multi-tiered Belt and Road financial cooperation network has taken an initial shape.
——这是民心相通不断促进的4年。“国之交在于民相亲，民相亲在于心相通。”“一带一路”建设参与国弘扬丝绸之路精神，开展智力丝绸之路、健康丝绸之路等建设，在科学、教育、文化、卫生、民间交往等各领域广泛开展合作，为“一带一路”建设夯实民意基础，筑牢社会根基。中国政府每年向相关国家提供1万个政府奖学金名额，地方政府也设立了丝绸之路专项奖学金，鼓励国际文教交流。各类丝绸之路文化年、旅游年、艺术节、影视桥、研讨会、智库对话等人文合作项目百花纷呈，人们往来频繁，在交流中拉近了心与心的距离。	
-- These four years have seen strengthened people-to-people connectivity. Friendship, which derives from close contact between the people, holds the key to sound state-to-state relations. Guided by the Silk Road spirit, we the Belt and Road Initiative participating countries have pulled our efforts to build the educational Silk Road and the health Silk Road, and carried out cooperation in science, education, culture, health and people-to-people exchange. Such cooperation has helped lay a solid popular and social foundation for pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative. Every year, the Chinese government provides 10,000 government scholarships to the relevant countries. China's local governments have also set up special Silk Road scholarships to encourage international cultural and educational exchanges. Projects of people-to-people cooperation such as Silk Road culture year, tourism year, art festival, film and TV project, seminar and think tank dialogue are flourishing. These interactions have brought our people increasingly closer.
丰硕的成果表明，“一带一路”倡议顺应时代潮流，适应发展规律，符合各国人民利益，具有广阔前景。	
These fruitful outcomes show that the Belt and Road Initiative responds to the trend of the times, conforms to the law of development, and meets the people's interests. It surely has broad prospects.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
中国人说，“万事开头难”。“一带一路”建设已经迈出坚实步伐。我们要乘势而上、顺势而为，推动“一带一路”建设行稳致远，迈向更加美好的未来。这里，我谈几点意见。	
As we often say in China, "The beginning is the most difficult part." A solid first step has been taken in pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative. We should build on the sound momentum generated to steer the Belt and Road Initiative toward greater success. In pursuing this endeavor, we should be guided by the following principles:
第一，我们要将“一带一路”建成和平之路。古丝绸之路，和时兴，战时衰。“一带一路”建设离不开和平安宁的环境。我们要构建以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，打造对话不对抗、结伴不结盟的伙伴关系。各国应该尊重彼此主权、尊严、领土完整，尊重彼此发展道路和社会制度，尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切。	
First, we should build the Belt and Road into a road for peace. The ancient silk routes thrived in times of peace, but lost vigor in times of war. The pursuit of the Belt and Road Initiative requires a peaceful and stable environment. We should foster a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation; and we should forge partnerships of dialogue with no confrontation and of friendship rather than alliance. All countries should respect each other's sovereignty, dignity and territorial integrity, each other's development paths and social systems, and each other's core interests and major concerns.
古丝绸之路沿线地区曾经是“流淌着牛奶与蜂蜜的地方”，如今很多地方却成了冲突动荡和危机挑战的代名词。这种状况不能再持续下去。我们要树立共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全观，营造共建共享的安全格局。要着力化解热点，坚持政治解决；要着力斡旋调解，坚持公道正义；要着力推进反恐，标本兼治，消除贫困落后和社会不公。	
Some regions along the ancient Silk Road used to be a land of milk and honey. Yet today, these places are often associated with conflict, turbulence, crisis and challenge. Such state of affairs should not be allowed to continue. We should foster the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and create a security environment built and shared by all. We should work to resolve hotspot issues through political means, and promote mediation in the spirit of justice. We should intensify counter-terrorism efforts, address both its symptoms and root causes, and strive to eradicate poverty, backwardness and social injustice.
第二，我们要将“一带一路”建成繁荣之路。发展是解决一切问题的总钥匙。推进“一带一路”建设，要聚焦发展这个根本性问题，释放各国发展潜力，实现经济大融合、发展大联动、成果大共享。	
Second, we should build the Belt and Road into a road of prosperity. Development holds the master key to solving all problems. In pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, we should focus on the fundamental issue of development, release the growth potential of various countries and achieve economic integration and interconnected development and deliver benefits to all.
产业是经济之本。我们要深入开展产业合作，推动各国产业发展规划相互兼容、相互促进，抓好大项目建设，加强国际产能和装备制造合作，抓住新工业革命的发展新机遇，培育新业态，保持经济增长活力。	
Industries are the foundation of economy. We should deepen industrial cooperation so that industrial development plans of different countries will complement and reinforce each other. Focus should be put on launching major projects. We should strengthen international cooperation on production capacity and equipment manufacturing, and seize new development opportunities presented by the new industrial revolution to foster new businesses and maintain dynamic growth.
金融是现代经济的血液。血脉通，增长才有力。我们要建立稳定、可持续、风险可控的金融保障体系，创新投资和融资模式，推广政府和社会资本合作，建设多元化融资体系和多层次资本市场，发展普惠金融，完善金融服务网络。	
Finance is the lifeblood of modern economy. Only when the blood circulates smoothly can one grow. We should establish a stable and sustainable financial safeguard system that keeps risks under control, create new models of investment and financing, encourage greater cooperation between government and private capital and build a diversified financing system and a multi-tiered capital market. We should also develop inclusive finance and improve financial services networks.
设施联通是合作发展的基础。我们要着力推动陆上、海上、天上、网上四位一体的联通，聚焦关键通道、关键城市、关键项目，联结陆上公路、铁路道路网络和海上港口网络。我们已经确立“一带一路”建设六大经济走廊框架，要扎扎实实向前推进。要抓住新一轮能源结构调整和能源技术变革趋势，建设全球能源互联网，实现绿色低碳发展。要完善跨区域物流网建设。我们也要促进政策、规则、标准三位一体的联通，为互联互通提供机制保障。	
Infrastructure connectivity is the foundation of development through cooperation. We should promote land, maritime, air and cyberspace connectivity, concentrate our efforts on key passageways, cities and projects and connect networks of highways, railways and sea ports. The goal of building six major economic corridors under the Belt and Road Initiative has been set, and we should endeavor to meet it. We need to seize opportunities presented by the new round of change in energy mix and the revolution in energy technologies to develop global energy interconnection and achieve green and low-carbon development. We should improve trans-regional logistics network and promote connectivity of policies, rules and standards so as to provide institutional safeguards for enhancing connectivity.
第三，我们要将“一带一路”建成开放之路。开放带来进步，封闭导致落后。对一个国家而言，开放如同破茧成蝶，虽会经历一时阵痛，但将换来新生。“一带一路”建设要以开放为导向，解决经济增长和平衡问题。	
Third, we should build the Belt and Road into a road of opening up. Opening up brings progress while isolation results in backwardness. For a country, opening up is like the struggle of a chrysalis breaking free from its cacoon. There will be short-term pains, but such pains will create a new life. The Belt and Road Initiative should be an open one that will achieve both economic growth and balanced development.
我们要打造开放型合作平台，维护和发展开放型世界经济，共同创造有利于开放发展的环境，推动构建公正、合理、透明的国际经贸投资规则体系，促进生产要素有序流动、资源高效配置、市场深度融合。我们欢迎各国结合自身国情，积极发展开放型经济，参与全球治理和公共产品供给，携手构建广泛的利益共同体。	
We should build an open platform of cooperation and uphold and grow an open world economy. We should jointly create an environment that will facilitate opening up and development, establish a fair, equitable and transparent system of international trade and investment rules and boost the orderly flow of production factors, efficient resources allocation and full market integration. We welcome efforts made by other countries to grow open economies based on their national conditions, participate in global governance and provide public goods. Together, we can build a broad community of shared interests.
贸易是经济增长的重要引擎。我们要有“向外看”的胸怀，维护多边贸易体制，推动自由贸易区建设，促进贸易和投资自由化便利化。当然，我们也要着力解决发展失衡、治理困境、数字鸿沟、分配差距等问题，建设开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的经济全球化。
Trade is an important engine driving growth. We should embrace the outside world with an open mind, uphold the multilateral trading regime, advance the building of free trade areas and promote liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment. Of course, we should also focus on resolving issues such as imbalances in development, difficulties in governance, digital divide and income disparity and make economic globalization open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
第四，我们要将“一带一路”建成创新之路。创新是推动发展的重要力量。“一带一路”建设本身就是一个创举，搞好“一带一路”建设也要向创新要动力。	
Fourth, we should build the Belt and Road into a road of innovation. Innovation is an important force powering development. The Belt and Road Initiative is new by nature and we need to encourage innovation in pursuing this initiative.
我们要坚持创新驱动发展，加强在数字经济、人工智能、纳米技术、量子计算机等前沿领域合作，推动大数据、云计算、智慧城市建设，连接成21世纪的数字丝绸之路。我们要促进科技同产业、科技同金融深度融合，优化创新环境，集聚创新资源。我们要为互联网时代的各国青年打造创业空间、创业工场，成就未来一代的青春梦想。	
We should pursue innovation-driven development and intensify cooperation in frontier areas such as digital economy, artificial intelligence, nanotechnology and quantum computing, and advance the development of big data, cloud computing and smart cities so as to turn them into a digital silk road of the 21st century. We should spur the full integration of science and technology into industries and finance, improve the environment for innovation and pool resources for innovation. We should create space and build workshops for young people of various countries to cultivate entrepreneurship in this age of the internet and help realize their dreams.
我们要践行绿色发展的新理念，倡导绿色、低碳、循环、可持续的生产生活方式，加强生态环保合作，建设生态文明，共同实现2030年可持续发展目标。	
We should pursue the new vision of green development and a way of life and work that is green, low-carbon, circular and sustainable. Efforts should be made to strengthen cooperation in ecological and environmental protection and build a sound ecosystem so as to realize the goals set by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
第五，我们要将“一带一路”建成文明之路。“一带一路”建设要以文明交流超越文明隔阂、文明互鉴超越文明冲突、文明共存超越文明优越，推动各国相互理解、相互尊重、相互信任。	
Fifth, we should build the Belt and Road into a road connecting different civilizations. In pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, we should ensure that when it comes to different civilizations, exchange will replace estrangement, mutual learning will replace clashes, and coexistence will replace a sense of superiority. This will boost mutual understanding, mutual respect and mutual trust among different countries.
我们要建立多层次人文合作机制，搭建更多合作平台，开辟更多合作渠道。要推动教育合作，扩大互派留学生规模，提升合作办学水平。要发挥智库作用，建设好智库联盟和合作网络。在文化、体育、卫生领域，要创新合作模式，推动务实项目。要用好历史文化遗产，联合打造具有丝绸之路特色的旅游产品和遗产保护。我们要加强各国议会、政党、民间组织往来，密切妇女、青年、残疾人等群体交流，促进包容发展。我们也要加强国际反腐合作，让“一带一路”成为廉洁之路。	
We should establish a multi-tiered mechanism for cultural and people-to-people exchanges, build more cooperation platforms and open more cooperation channels. Educational cooperation should be boosted, more exchange students should be encouraged and the performance of cooperatively run schools should be enhanced. Think tanks should play a better role and efforts should be made to establish think tank networks and partnerships. In the cultural, sports and health sectors, new cooperation models should be created to facilitate projects with concrete benefits. Historical and cultural heritage should be fully tapped to jointly develop tourist products and protect heritage in ways that preserve the distinctive features of the Silk Road. We should strengthen exchanges between parliaments, political parties and non-governmental organizations of different countries as well as between women, youths and people with disabilities with a view to achieving inclusive development. We should also strengthen international counter-corruption cooperation so that the Belt and Road will be a road with high ethical standards.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
当前，中国发展正站在新的起点上。我们将深入贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，不断适应、把握、引领经济发展新常态，积极推进供给侧结构性改革，实现持续发展，为“一带一路”注入强大动力，为世界发展带来新的机遇。	
China has reached a new starting point in its development endeavors. Guided by the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development, we will adapt to and steer the new normal of economic development and seize opportunities it presents. We will actively promote supply-side structural reform to achieve sustainable development, inject strong impetus into the Belt and Road Initiative and create new opportunities for global development.
——中国愿在和平共处五项原则基础上，发展同所有“一带一路”建设参与国的友好合作。中国愿同世界各国分享发展经验，但不会干涉他国内政，不会输出社会制度和发展模式，更不会强加于人。我们推进“一带一路”建设不会重复地缘博弈的老套路，而将开创合作共赢的新模式；不会形成破坏稳定的小集团，而将建设和谐共存的大家庭。	
-- China will enhance friendship and cooperation with all countries involved in the Belt and Road Initiative on the basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Co-existence. We are ready to share practices of development with other countries, but we have no intention to interfere in other countries' internal affairs, export our own social system and model of development, or impose our own will on others. In pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative, we will not resort to outdated geopolitical maneuvering. What we hope to achieve is a new model of win-win cooperation. We have no intention to form a small group detrimental to stability, what we hope to create is a big family of harmonious co-existence.
——中国已经同很多国家达成了“一带一路”务实合作协议，其中既包括交通运输、基础设施、能源等硬件联通项目，也包括通信、海关、检验检疫等软件联通项目，还包括经贸、产业、电子商务、海洋和绿色经济等多领域的合作规划和具体项目。中国同有关国家的铁路部门将签署深化中欧班列合作协议。我们将推动这些合作项目早日启动、早见成效。	
-- China has reached practical cooperation agreements with many countries on pursuing the Belt and Road Initiative. These agreements cover not only projects of hardware connectivity, like transport, infrastructure and energy, but also software connectivity, involving telecommunications, customs and quarantine inspection. The agreements also include plans and projects for cooperation in economy and trade, industry, e-commerce, marine and green economy. The Chinese railway authorities will sign agreements with their counterparts of related countries to deepen cooperation on China-Europe regular railway cargo service. We will work to launch these cooperation projects at an early date and see that they deliver early benefits.
——中国将加大对“一带一路”建设资金支持，向丝路基金新增资金1000亿元人民币，鼓励金融机构开展人民币海外基金业务，规模预计约3000亿元人民币。中国国家开发银行、进出口银行将分别提供2500亿元和1300亿元等值人民币专项贷款，用于支持“一带一路”基础设施建设、产能、金融合作。我们还将同亚洲基础设施投资银行、金砖国家新开发银行、世界银行及其他多边开发机构合作支持“一带一路”项目，同有关各方共同制定“一带一路”融资指导原则。	
-- China will scale up financing support for the Belt and Road Initiative by contributing an additional RMB 100 billion to the Silk Road Fund, and we encourage financial institutions to conduct overseas RMB fund business with an estimated amount of about RMB 300 billion. The China Development Bank and the Export-Import Bank of China will set up special lending schemes respectively worth RMB 250 billion equivalent and RMB 130 billion equivalent to support Belt and Road cooperation on infrastructure, industrial capacity and financing. We will also work with the AIIB, the BRICS New Development Bank, the World Bank and other multilateral development institutions to support Belt and Road related projects. We will work with other parties concerned to jointly formulate guidelines for financing the Belt and Road related development projects.
——中国将积极同“一带一路”建设参与国发展互利共赢的经贸伙伴关系，促进同各相关国家贸易和投资便利化，建设“一带一路”自由贸易网络，助力地区和世界经济增长。本届论坛期间，中国将同30多个国家签署经贸合作协议，同有关国家协商自由贸易协定。中国将从2018年起举办中国国际进口博览会。	
-- China will endeavor to build a win-win business partnership with other countries participating in the Belt and Road Initiative, enhance trade and investment facilitation with them, and build a Belt and Road free trade network. These efforts are designed to promote growth both in our respective regions and globally. During this forum, China will sign business and trade cooperation agreements with over 30 countries and enter into consultation on free trade agreements with related countries. China will host the China International Import Expo starting from 2018.
——中国愿同各国加强创新合作，启动“一带一路”科技创新行动计划，开展科技人文交流、共建联合实验室、科技园区合作、技术转移4项行动。我们将在未来5年内安排2500人次青年科学家来华从事短期科研工作，培训5000人次科学技术和管理人员，投入运行50家联合实验室。我们将设立生态环保大数据服务平台，倡议建立“一带一路”绿色发展国际联盟，并为相关国家应对气候变化提供援助。	
-- China will enhance cooperation on innovation with other countries. We will launch the Belt and Road Science, Technology and Innovation Cooperation Action Plan, which consists of the Science and Technology People-to-People Exchange Initiative, the Joint Laboratory Initiative, the Science Park Cooperation Initiative and the Technology Transfer Initiative. In the coming five years, we will offer 2,500 short-term research visits to China for young foreign scientists, train 5,000 foreign scientists, engineers and managers, and set up 50 joint laboratories. We will set up a big data service platform on ecological and environmental protection. We propose the establishment of an international coalition for green development on the Belt and Road, and we will provide support to related countries in adapting to climate change.
——中国将在未来3年向参与“一带一路”建设的发展中国家和国际组织提供600亿元人民币援助，建设更多民生项目。我们将向“一带一路”沿线发展中国家提供20亿元人民币紧急粮食援助，向南南合作援助基金增资10亿美元，在沿线国家实施100个“幸福家园”、100个“爱心助困”、100个“康复助医”等项目。我们将向有关国际组织提供10亿美元落实一批惠及沿线国家的合作项目。	
-- In the coming three years, China will provide assistance worth RMB 60 billion to developing countries and international organizations participating in the Belt and Road Initiative to launch more projects to improve people's well-being. We will provide emergency food aid worth RMB 2 billion to developing countries along the Belt and Road and make an additional contribution of US$1 billion to the Assistance Fund for South-South Cooperation. China will launch 100 "happy home" projects, 100 poverty alleviation projects and 100 health care and rehabilitation projects in countries along the Belt and Road. China will provide relevant international organizations with US$1 billion to implement cooperation projects that will benefit the countries along the Belt and Road.
——中国将设立“一带一路”国际合作高峰论坛后续联络机制，成立“一带一路”财经发展研究中心、“一带一路”建设促进中心，同多边开发银行共同设立多边开发融资合作中心，同国际货币基金组织合作建立能力建设中心。我们将建设丝绸之路沿线民间组织合作网络，打造新闻合作联盟、音乐教育联盟以及其他人文合作新平台。	
-- China will put in place the following mechanisms to boost Belt and Road cooperation: a liaison office for the Forum's follow-up activities, the Research Center for the Belt and Road Financial and Economic Development, the Facilitating Center for Building the Belt and Road, the Multilateral Development Financial Cooperation Center in cooperation with multilateral development banks, and an IMF-China Capacity Building Center. We will also develop a network for cooperation among the NGOs in countries along the Belt and Road as well as new people-to-people exchange platforms such as a Belt and Road news alliance and a music education alliance.
“一带一路”建设植根于丝绸之路的历史土壤，重点面向亚欧非大陆，同时向所有朋友开放。不论来自亚洲、欧洲，还是非洲、美洲，都是“一带一路”建设国际合作的伙伴。“一带一路”建设将由大家共同商量，“一带一路”建设成果将由大家共同分享。	
The Belt and Road Initiative is rooted in the ancient Silk Road. It focuses on the Asian, European and African continents, but is also open to all other countries. All countries, from either Asia, Europe, Africa or the Americas, can be international cooperation partners of the Belt and Road Initiative. The pursuit of this initiative is based on extensive consultation and its benefits will be shared by us all.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear Friends,
中国古语讲：“不积跬步，无以至千里。”阿拉伯谚语说，“金字塔是一块块石头垒成的”。欧洲也有句话：“伟业非一日之功”。“一带一路”建设是伟大的事业，需要伟大的实践。让我们一步一个脚印推进实施，一点一滴抓出成果，造福世界，造福人民！	
An ancient Chinese saying goes, "A long journey can be covered only by taking one step at a time". Similarly, there is an Arab proverb which says that the Pyramid was built by piling one stone on another. In Europe, there is also the saying that "Rome wasn't built in a day." The Belt and Road Initiative is a great undertaking which requires dedicated efforts. Let us pursue this initiative step by step and deliver outcome one by one. By doing so, we will bring true benefit to both the world and all our people!
祝本次高峰论坛圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish the Belt and Road Forum for International Cooperation a full success!
谢谢大家。	
Thank you!