78. 习近平在柬埔寨媒体发表署名文章《做肝胆相照的好邻居、真朋友》
做肝胆相照的好邻居、真朋友
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
China and Cambodia: Good Neighbors and Trusted Friends
By H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People's Republic of China
应柬埔寨王国国王西哈莫尼邀请，我将对柬埔寨王国进行国事访问。这是我担任中国国家主席后首次访问柬埔寨，我对这次访问充满期待。	
At the invitation of King Norodom Sihamoni, I will pay a state visit to the Kingdom of Cambodia. This will be my first visit to Cambodia as the President of China, a visit I look forward to with great anticipation.
柬埔寨是古代海上丝绸之路重要一站，拥有悠久辉煌的历史文化和独具特色的高棉文化。勤劳智慧的柬埔寨人民创造了璀璨夺目的吴哥古迹，其宏伟的建筑和精美的浮雕壁画巧夺天工，令人叹为观止，在人类文明史上留下了不朽篇章。进入21世纪，柬埔寨国家建设事业蒸蒸日上，人民生活水平不断提高，未来值得期待。	
Cambodia, an important link on the ancient Maritime Silk Road, is renowned for its rich history and the unique Khmer culture. Angkor Wat, with its magnificent architecture and stunning bas-reliefs, stands as a true tribute to the talent of the Cambodian people and shines in the annals of human civilization. Entering the 21st century, Cambodia has made much progress in its development and delivered a better life to its people. It is heading towards a promising future.
中国同柬埔寨地理相近、文化相通，两国友好交往历史可以追溯到1000多年前。通过海上丝绸之路，中国的瓷器、漆器，柬埔寨的香料、黄蜡，源源不断送达对方民众手中。巴戎寺的壁画上雕刻有古代中国商人同柬埔寨人民往来的生动情景。5世纪至6世纪中国南北朝时期，僧伽婆罗、曼陀罗、须菩提3位高僧先后来中国传经弘法。中国元代使节周达观到访柬埔寨后写下《真腊风土记》一书，记载了吴哥的风土人情和中柬两国人民的友好往来。中国明代航海家郑和远洋航海时多次在柬埔寨停留，称这里“气候常热，田禾丰足，煮海为盐，风俗富饶”。坐落在磅湛市郊的三保公庙香火绵延，诉说着中柬两国人民的不解之缘。	
China and Cambodia are geographically and culturally close to each other, and our friendly exchanges trace back more than a millennium. Through the ancient Maritime Silk Road, Chinese porcelain and lacquer wares were brought to Cambodia, and Cambodian spices and yellow wax stones were sent to China. The bas-reliefs of the Bayon Temple vividly depict the scenes of Chinese merchants trading with the locals in Cambodia. During China's Southern and Northern Dynasties in the fifth and sixth centuries AD, Sanghapala, Mandrasena and Subhuti, three eminent Cambodian monks, came to China to disseminate Buddhism. In China's Yuan Dynasty, Zhou Daguan, a Chinese envoy, visited Cambodia. He later wrote The Customs of Cambodia, providing a vivid account of the local customs in Angkor and the friendly interactions between Chinese and Cambodians. Zheng He, the famous navigator from China's Ming Dynasty, made many stopovers in Cambodia on his voyages. He described Cambodia as a land with a warm climate and fertile fields where the locals boiled seawater to make salt and had colorful customs. The Sam Po Kong Temple in the suburb of Kampong Cham that honors Zheng He still has many visitors today, a testament to the time-honored friendship between Chinese and Cambodians.
柬埔寨谚语说“信任如树”，中柬传统友谊历经岁月洗礼和国际风云变幻考验，始终根深叶茂。这得益于两国老一辈领导人的精心培育。1958年，中国同柬埔寨正式建交，两国关系开启新篇章。58年来，两国历代领导人密切交往，建立了深厚友谊。西哈努克太皇动情地说：“柬中之间长期牢固的友谊，像一朵永不凋谢的鲜花，永远开放在晴朗的天空下。”这是中柬友好的真实写照。	
A Cambodian proverb likens trust to the growth of a tree. The traditional China-Cambodia friendship, tested by the times and a changing international landscape, has grown strong like a luxuriant tree thanks to efforts made by past leaders of both countries. In 1958, China and Cambodia established diplomatic ties, opening a new chapter in their bilateral relations. Over the past 58 years, successive leaders of both countries have maintained close interactions and developed a close bond of friendship. King Father Norodom Sihanouk once fondly said that the China-Cambodia friendship is like a flower that never withers and will always blossom under the bright sky.
进入新时期，中柬友谊历久弥新、不断传承和发扬光大。两国政治上高度互信，经济上互利双赢，各领域务实合作成果丰硕，在国际和地区事务中保持密切沟通和协调，堪称国与国平等相待、真诚合作的典范。	
Entering the new era, the China-Cambodia friendship has continued to flourish, beaming with new vitality. Our two countries enjoy deep political trust and win-win economic cooperation. We have carried out fruitful cooperation in various areas, and maintained close consultation and coordination on international and regional affairs, setting an example of how two countries should treat each other as equals and cooperate with absolute sincerity.
2010年，中柬两国建立全面战略合作伙伴关系，双边关系进入新时期。两国在国家发展理念上高度契合，一致同意加快“一带一路”倡议和“四角”战略对接。近年来，双边贸易和双向投资保持强劲增长势头，中国已经连续3年是柬埔寨第一大贸易伙伴、第一大投资来源国，2015年双边贸易额突破44亿美元。
In 2010, China and Cambodia established a comprehensive strategic partnership, ushering their ties into a new era. We share a similar development philosophy, and we agree to find ways for China's "Belt and Road" initiative and Cambodia's "Rectangular Strategy" to work together. Two-way trade and investment have maintained strong growth in recent years. China has been Cambodia's biggest trading partner and source of investment for three years. The year 2015 saw our two-way trade topping 4.4 billion U.S. dollars.
中国和柬埔寨是肝胆相照的好朋友。在关乎彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上，两国风雨同舟、守望相助。在柬埔寨争取国家独立和民族解放、维护和平安定的斗争中，中国给予柬埔寨坚定支持和帮助。上世纪90年代，中国派出800多人的工兵部队参加柬埔寨维和行动。在18个月时间里，他们完成了金边国际机场等3个机场、4条共长640多公里国家级公路的建造和修复任务，架设和修复桥梁40多座。他们用鲜血和汗水培育了中柬友谊。
China and Cambodia are devoted friends. On issues concerning each other's core interests and major concerns, our two countries have stood together and supported each other. China firmly supports and has assisted Cambodia in its fight for independence and liberation, as well as maintaining peace and stability. In the 1990s, a Chinese engineering corps of over 800 men took part in peacekeeping missions in Cambodia. In just 18 months, they built and repaired the Phnom Penh International Airport and two other airports, four national-level highways over 640 km in length and over 40 bridges. With blood and sweat, the Chinese peacekeepers helped nurture the China-Cambodia friendship.
我们不会忘记，在新中国成立之初遭受外部封锁和敌视的时候，柬埔寨率先同中国建交。在中国恢复在联合国合法席位的斗争中，柬埔寨给予坚定支持。在中国坚决维护国家领土主权和海洋权益、致力于通过和平谈判解决争端的时刻，柬埔寨秉持公正、仗义执言。在中国四川、青海、甘肃等地发生严重自然灾害时，柬埔寨王室、政府领导人、社会各界感同身受，伸出援助之手。中国人常说，“患难见真情”。柬埔寨谚语说，“只有在患难中，才能识别谁是真朋友，谁是假朋友”。中国人民和柬埔寨人民重情守诺、坦诚相待，中柬友好已经深深扎根于两国人民心中。	
We will never forget that Cambodia was among the first group of countries to establish diplomatic ties with New China when it faced a foreign blockade in its early days. Cambodia was firm in supporting China's efforts to restore its lawful seat in the United Nations. When China acted to safeguard its territorial sovereignty and maritime interests and was devoted to resolving related disputes through peaceful negotiation, Cambodia did not hesitate to speak out to uphold justice. When China's Sichuan, Qinghai and Gansu provinces were hit by natural disasters, the Cambodian royal family, government leaders and public shared our grief and extended a helping hand to us. We have a Chinese saying -- "Hardship reveals true friendship." Similarly, a Cambodian saying goes "Only in tough time can one tell a true friend from a false one." Our two peoples value our ties and treat each other as true friends; the China-Cambodia friendship has developed deep roots in the hearts of both peoples.
中国和柬埔寨是情同手足的好邻居。在推进国家建设、促进民生发展中，两国互帮互助。中国援建了柬埔寨第一条全线四车道国道，承建了柬埔寨第一家水泥厂、第一座火电站、最大规模的水电站。蓬勃发展的西哈努克港经济特区是中柬务实合作的样板。截至2016年6月，累计进入西哈努克港经济特区的企业达100家，投资额2.8亿美元，解决了超过1.3万柬埔寨民众就业问题。两国发挥经济互补优势，深挖潜力，在基础设施建设、农业水利、能源资源、信息通信等领域合作规模不断扩大、水平不断提高，一系列合作项目早期收获前景可期。	
China and Cambodia are neighbors who share a bond of brotherhood. The two countries have supported each other in improving the livelihoods of their respective people. China built Cambodia's first four-lane national highway as an assistance project and was contracted to build Cambodia's first cement plant, first coal-fired power station and its largest hydropower station. The booming Sihanoukville Special Economic Zone stands as testimony to how fruitful China-Cambodia cooperation can be. By June 2016, 100 companies were operating in the zone with a total investment of 280 million U.S. dollars, creating over 13,000 jobs. By strengthening economic complementarity and unlocking potential, our two countries have expanded and upgraded cooperation in infrastructure, agriculture, water conservancy, energy, resources, information and telecommunications; such cooperation projects are expected to deliver early returns.
中柬两国人文交流日益密切，给双边关系不断注入新的活力。中国文物专家长年扎根柬埔寨，保护和修复周萨神殿、茶胶寺等吴哥文物古迹。中国医疗专家赴柬埔寨巡回义诊，为上千柬埔寨民众实施白内障手术。中国农技专家深入柬埔寨农村，白天传授农业技术，晚上教授汉语，受到柬埔寨民众欢迎和喜爱。2009年在柬埔寨成立的孔子学院，已经由1个教学点发展到14个教学点，在校生超过1万名。截至2015年，通过中国政府奖学金来华留学的柬埔寨学生突破1000人。	
China and Cambodia enjoy flourishing people-to-people and cultural exchanges, which have added strong momentum to the growth of their relations. Chinese cultural relics experts have spent years in Cambodia to protect and restore the Chau Say Tevoda Temple and the Ta Keo Temple in Angkor. Chinese doctors have performed free cataract operations for over 1,000 patients across Cambodia. Chinese agro-technicians have passed on agro-technologies to Cambodian villagers during the day and taught them Chinese in the evening, moves that have been warmly received by the locals. The Confucius Institute launched in Cambodia in 2009 now offers classes to over 10,000 students in 14 different locations. By 2015, more than 1,000 Cambodian students were studying in China on scholarship programs sponsored by the Chinese government.
当前，中国和柬埔寨都处在发展的关键阶段，面临全面深化改革、扩大对外开放、优化产业结构的相同任务，同为区域经济一体化和区域合作的推动者、建设者。站在中柬关系新起点上，中国将同柬埔寨一道努力，推动两国全面战略合作伙伴关系实现全方位、多领域、深层次发展，更好造福两国人民。	
Both China and Cambodia are at crucial stages in their respective development and face the similar tasks of deepening reform, opening further and upgrading their economic structures. Both countries are committed to economic integration and cooperation in our region. Having reached a new stage in its relations with Cambodia, China will work with Cambodia to strengthen their bilateral comprehensive strategic partnership in a wide range of areas so as to deliver greater benefits to the two peoples.
——持之以恒深化政治互信。中方愿同柬方保持高层互访势头，加强战略沟通，希望两国政府、政党、立法机关、地方省市加强交往。中国将一如既往支持柬埔寨走符合本国国情的发展道路，坚定不移支持柬埔寨维护国家主权、保持国内稳定、加快经济发展。	
-- We will also deepen political trust. China will maintain high-level visits and enhance communication with Cambodia. I hope that the two countries will step up exchanges between their governments, political parties and legislatures as well as at the sub-national level. China will continue to support Cambodia in pursuing a development path that suits its own national conditions and firmly support Cambodia in safeguarding sovereignty, maintaining domestic stability and accelerating economic development.
——扎实深入推动互利合作。中方愿同柬方加强发展战略对接，打造“一带一路”合作亮点，因地制宜深化产能合作，推动农业水利、基础设施、信息通信等领域合作取得务实成果。中方愿采取措施扩大从柬埔寨进口，扩大双边贸易规模。	
-- We will take solid steps to promote win-win cooperation. China will continue to examine how our respective development strategies can complement one another and launch priority projects within the "Belt and Road" initiative to better involve Cambodia. We will, in light of local conditions, deepen cooperation in areas such as agriculture, water conservancy, infrastructure, information and telecommunications. China will take measures to increase imports from Cambodia and scale up two-way trade.
——坚定不移加强国际协作。中国支持柬埔寨作为东盟重要成员在本地区事务中发挥重要作用，愿同柬方在东亚合作、澜沧江－湄公河合作、联合国等地区和多边舞台加强协调和配合，维护两国和发展中国家共同利益，积极打造亚洲命运共同体。东亚合作正处在关键发展阶段，我们应该继续聚焦发展主题，推动东亚合作健康稳定发展。	
-- We will strengthen coordination with Cambodia on the international stage. China supports Cambodia as an important member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and will deepen collaboration with Cambodia in East Asia, the Lancang-Mekong River, the United Nations and other regional and multilateral arenas. The purpose of such collaboration is to uphold the common interests of our two countries and other developing countries and build an Asian community with a shared future. East Asia cooperation has entered a critical stage. We should continue to focus on the general goal of development and promote sound and steady progress in East Asia.
——细水长流促进民心相通。中方愿同柬方一道，用好孔子学院、中国文化之家等平台，加强在教育文化、旅游卫生等方面合作，增进两国人民特别是两国青年相互了解和友好感情，让中柬友好世代相传。	
-- We will endeavor to enhance people-to-people friendship. China will work with Cambodia to unleash the full potential of the Confucius Institute and the China Culture Center and enhance cooperation in education, culture, tourism and health. With these efforts, we can deepen mutual understanding and friendship between our two peoples, especially among young people, and ensure that the China-Cambodia friendship will be passed on from generation to generation.
我深信，在我们共同努力下，中柬传统友谊一定会结出新硕果，我们将永远做肝胆相照的好邻居、真朋友。	
I am convinced that with our concerted efforts, the traditional friendship between China and Cambodia will bear more fruits, allowing us to forever be good neighbors and genuine trusted friends.