81 习近平在二十国集团工商峰会开幕式上的主旨演讲
中国发展新起点 全球增长新蓝图
（2016年9月3日，杭州）
A New Starting Point for China's Development
A New Blueprint for Global Growth
Hangzhou, 3 September 2016
女士们，先生们，朋友们：	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
下午好！很高兴同大家在杭州相聚。明天，二十国集团领导人峰会就要拉开帷幕。国际社会期待着这次峰会，工商、智库、劳动、妇女、青年等社会各界也期待着这次峰会。大家目标高度一致，那就是推动杭州峰会取得丰硕成果。	
Good afternoon! I am so glad to have all of you with us here in Hangzhou. The G20 Summit will begin tomorrow, an event much anticipated by the international community as well as the business community, think tanks, and the labor, women and youth organizations. And all of us share one and the same goal, that is, to make the Hangzhou Summit deliver fruitful outcomes.
杭州是中国的一个历史文化重镇和商贸中心。千百年来，从白居易到苏东坡，从西湖到大运河，杭州的悠久历史和文化传说引人入胜。杭州是创新活力之城，电子商务蓬勃发展，在杭州点击鼠标，联通的是整个世界。杭州也是生态文明之都，山明水秀，晴好雨奇，浸透着江南韵味，凝结着世代匠心。	
Hangzhou is a renowned historical and cultural city and a center of business and trade in China. Famous for Bai Juyi, a leading Chinese poet in the Tang Dynasty and Su Dongpo, a popular poet in the Song Dynasty who spent time in Hangzhou, as well as the West Lake and the Grand Canal, Hangzhou has a fascinating history and rich and enchanting cultural heritage. Hangzhou is also an innovative and vibrant city with booming e-commerce. Just click the mouse in Hangzhou, and you connect the whole world. Hangzhou is also a leader in ecological conservation. Its green hills and clear lakes and rivers delight the eye on sunny days and present a special view on rainy days. Hangzhou is imbued with a charm unique to the south of the Yangtze River that has been fostered over many generations.
我曾在浙江工作了6个年头，熟悉这里的山水草木、风土人情，参与和见证了这里的发展。在中国，像杭州这样的城市有很多，在过去几十年经历了大发展、大变化，许许多多普通家庭用勤劳的双手改变了自己的生活。这一点一滴的变化，集合起来就是磅礴的力量，推动着中国发展进步，折射出中国改革开放的伟大进程。	
I spent six years working in Zhejiang Province and was personally involved in its development endeavor. So I am familiar with everything here, its land and its people. In China, there are many cities like Hangzhou which have gone through great changes and achieved tremendous development over the decades. Millions of ordinary Chinese families have changed their lives through hard work. When added up, these small changes have become a powerful force driving China’s development and progress. What we see here in Hangzhou showcases what has been achieved in the great course of reform and opening-up China has embarked upon.
——这是探索前行的进程。一个13亿多人口的大国实现现代化，在人类历史上没有先例可循。中国的发展注定要走一条属于自己的道路。我们“摸着石头过河”，不断深化改革开放，不断探索前进，开创和发展了中国特色社会主义。	
― This is a course of blazing a new trail. Modernizing a big country with a population of more than 1.3 billion is an endeavor never undertaken in the history of mankind, and this means China must pursue its own path of development. What we have done is, as a Chinese saying puts it, “crossing the river by feeling for stones”. We have deepened reform and opening-up, broken new ground and forged ahead, and established and developed socialism with distinctive Chinese features.
——这是真抓实干的进程。我们紧紧抓住经济建设这个中心不放松，与时俱进，开拓创新，靠着拼劲、闯劲、干劲，靠着钉钉子精神，把中国建成世界第二大经济体、最大货物贸易国、第三大对外直接投资国，人均国内生产总值接近8000美元。	
― This is a course of delivering tangible outcomes. We have pursued economic development as the top priority and never slackened our efforts. We have moved with the times and taken bold initiatives. Thanks to our perseverance, resolve and dedication, and the spirit of driving the nail, we have succeeded in turning China into the world's second biggest economy, the biggest trader of goods and the third largest direct overseas investor, and lifted China’s per capita GDP to close to 8,000 US dollars.
——这是共同富裕的进程。发展为了人民、发展依靠人民、发展成果由人民共享，这是中国推进改革开放和社会主义现代化建设的根本目的。改革开放以来，中国有7亿多人口摆脱贫困，13亿多人民的生活质量和水平大幅度提升，用几十年时间完成了其他国家几百年走过的发展历程。	
― This is a course of achieving common prosperity. Development is for the people; it should be pursued by the people and its outcomes should be shared by the people. This is what China's reform, opening-up and socialist modernization drive are all about. Thanks to this reform and opening-up endeavor, China has lifted over 700 million people out of poverty and significantly made life better for its 1.3 billion-plus people. In pursuing development, we have accomplished just in a few decades what has taken other countries several hundred years to achieve.
——这是中国走向世界、世界走向中国的进程。我们奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，坚持对外开放的基本国策，敞开大门搞建设，从大规模引进来到大踏步走出去，积极推动建设更加公正合理的国际秩序，中国同外部世界的互动持续加深，中国的朋友遍布世界。	
― This is a course of China and the world embracing each other. We have pursued an independent foreign policy of peace and a fundamental policy of opening-up. We have endeavored to develop in an open environment, starting by introducing large scale overseas investment and then going global with big strides. We have been actively involved in building a fairer and more equitable international order. China's interaction with the outside world has deepened. And indeed, we have friends all over the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
改革开放38年过去，弹指一挥间。今天，随着中国经济体量的增大以及同世界的合作不断加深，中国经济走向受到外界关注。很多人都关心，中国经济能否实现持续稳定增长？中国能否把改革开放推进下去？中国能否避免陷入“中等收入陷阱”？	
Thirty-eight years of reform and opening-up have unfolded rapidly. Today, as China's economy grows in size and its cooperation with the world deepens, the prospect of China’s economy has drawn keen international attention. Many people wonder whether China can maintain sustainable and steady growth, whether China can continue its reform and opening-up, and whether China can avoid falling into the "middle income trap".
行胜于言。中国用实际行动对这些问题作出了回答。今年年初，中国出台了国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划纲要，围绕全面建成小康社会奋斗目标，针对发展不平衡、不协调、不可持续等突出问题，强调要牢固树立和坚决贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念。	
Actions speak louder than words. China has answered these questions with actions. Early this year, China drew up the outlines of the 13th five-year plan for economic and social development. These outlines call for implementing the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development, addressing acute challenges of uneven, uncoordinated and unsustainable development, and ultimately achieving a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
今天的中国，已经站在新的历史起点上。这个新起点，就是中国全面深化改革、增加经济社会发展新动力的新起点，就是中国适应经济发展新常态、转变经济发展方式的新起点，就是中国同世界深度互动、向世界深度开放的新起点。我们有信心、有能力保持经济中高速增长，继续在实现自身发展的同时为世界带来更多发展机遇。	
China has reached a new historical starting point. It is a new starting point for China to deepen reform across the board and foster new drivers of economic and social development. It is a new starting point for China to adapt its economy to a new normal and transform its growth model. It is a new starting point for China to further integrate itself into the world and open itself wider to the world. We have the confidence and ability to maintain medium-high rate of growth and deliver more development opportunities to the world while ensuring our own development.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移全面深化改革，开拓更好发展前景。中国经济发展进入新常态，这是中国经济向形态更高级、分工更优化、结构更合理阶段演进的必经过程。要在新常态下保持经济中高速增长，必须依靠改革。因循守旧没有出路，畏缩不前坐失良机。中国改革的方向已经明确、不会动摇；中国改革的步伐将坚定向前、不会放慢。	
― Proceeding from this new starting point, we will steadfastly deepen reform in an all-round way and open up brighter prospects of development. China's economic development has entered a new normal, a stage it cannot bypass if China is to upgrade its economy and make it better structured. Reform is crucial to maintaining medium-high rate of growth under the new normal. Sticking to convention will get us nowhere. Fear to advance will only result in losing the opportunity. China's goal of reform has been set and we will not deviate from it. China will take sure and firm steps in advancing reform and will not slow down its pace.
中国改革已经进入攻坚期和深水区，我们将以壮士断腕的勇气、凤凰涅槃的决心，敢于向积存多年的顽瘴痼疾开刀，敢于触及深层次利益关系和矛盾，把改革进行到底。我们将继续推进供给侧结构性改革，解决好当前经济发展中的主要矛盾，通过优化要素配置和调整产业结构提高供给体系质量和效率，激发市场活力，促进协调发展。我们将继续创新体制机制、突破利益固化藩篱，全面推进依法治国，更好发挥市场在资源配置中的决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用。	
China's reform has entered the deep water zone where tough challenges must be met. We have the resolve to make painful self-adjustments and tackle problems that have built up over many years, particularly underlying issues and entrenched interests and carry reform through to the end. We will continue to carry out supply-side structural reform, resolve major problems in economic development and improve the performance of the supply system by optimizing factors allocation and adjusting industrial structure. With these efforts, we can energize the market and achieve coordinated development. We will continue to explore new institutional mechanism, break through the resistance of vested interests, exercise law-based governance and better leverage both the decisive role of the market in resource allocation and the role of the government.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移实施创新驱动发展战略，释放更强增长动力。抓住科技创新就抓住了发展的牛鼻子。我们清醒认识到，中国经济发展不少领域大而不强、大而不优，长期以来主要依靠资源、资本、劳动力等要素投入支撑经济增长和规模扩张的方式已不可持续，中国发展正面临着动力转换、方式转变、结构调整的繁重任务。建设创新型国家和世界科技强国，是中国发展的迫切要求和必由之路。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will pursue an innovation-driven development strategy to create stronger growth drivers. Scientific and technological innovation holds the key to development. We are keenly aware that many sectors of China's economy are not strong or competitive enough despite their big sizes. Over the years, they have depended on input of resources, capital and labor force to achieve growth and expand scale. But this model is no longer sustainable. China now faces the challenging task of changing its growth drivers and growth model and adjusting its economic structure. To make China an innovative country and a leader in science and technology is what China must do now in pursuing development.
我们正在实施创新驱动发展战略，发挥创新第一动力的作用，努力实现从量的增长向质的提升转变。我们将推广发展理念、体制机制、商业模式等全方位、多层次、宽领域的大创新，在推动发展的内生动力和活力上来一个根本性转变。我们将力争在重大项目、重点方向率先突破，积极牵头实施国际大科学计划和大科学工程。我们将深入研究和解决经济和产业发展急需的科技问题，围绕促进转方式调结构、建设现代产业体系、培育战略性新兴产业、发展现代服务业等方面需求推动科技成果转移转化，推动产业和产品向价值链中高端跃升，塑造更多依靠创新驱动、更多发挥先发优势的引领性发展。	
We are implementing the innovation-driven development strategy so as to leverage the role of innovation as the primary growth driver and make growth quality based rather than quantity based. We will promote all-dimensional, multi-tiered and wide-ranging changes in principles guiding development, institutional structures and business models so as to bring about a fundamental transformation of the forces driving development and create new impetus for it. We will strive to make breakthroughs in major projects and priority areas and take the lead in undertaking major international scientific programs and projects. We will conduct research on and resolve pressing scientific and technological issues holding back economic and industrial development. We will speed up the commercialization of R&D achievements to meet the need of shifting the growth model, adjusting economic structure, building a modern industrial system, fostering strategic emerging industries and developing a modern service industry. In short, we aim to move our industries and products up to the medium-high end of the value chain and create more innovation-driven growth areas with first-mover advantages that will lead development.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移推动绿色发展，谋求更佳质量效益。我多次说过，绿水青山就是金山银山，保护环境就是保护生产力，改善环境就是发展生产力。这个朴素的道理正得到越来越多人们的认同。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will promote green development to achieve better economic performance. I have said for many times that green mountains and clear water are as good as mountains of gold and silver. To protect the environment is to protect productivity, and to improve the environment is to boost productivity. This simple fact is increasingly recognized by people.
我们将毫不动摇实施可持续发展战略，坚持绿色低碳循环发展，坚持节约资源和保护环境的基本国策。我们推动绿色发展，也是为了主动应对气候变化和产能过剩问题。今后5年，中国单位国内生产总值用水量、能耗、二氧化碳排放量将分别下降23%、15%、18%。我们要建设天蓝、地绿、水清的美丽中国，让老百姓在宜居的环境中享受生活，切实感受到经济发展带来的生态效益。	
We will unwaveringly pursue a strategy of sustainable development and stay committed to green, low-carbon and circular development and China's fundamental policy of conserving resources and protecting the environment. In promoting green development, we also aim to address climate change and overcapacity. In the next five years, China's water and energy consumption as well as CO2 emission per unit of GDP will be cut down by 23%, 15% and 18% respectively. We will make China a beautiful country with blue sky, green vegetation and clear rivers, so that the people will enjoy life in a livable environment and the ecological benefits created by economic development.
从2016年开始，我们正大力推进供给侧结构性改革，主动调节供求关系，要用5年时间再压减粗钢产能1亿至1.5亿吨，用3至5年时间再退出煤炭产能5亿吨左右、减量重组5亿吨左右。这是我们从自身长远发展出发，从去产能、调结构、稳增长出发，自主采取的行动。中国在去产能方面，力度最大，举措最实，说到就会做到。	
Starting from 2016, we have been vigorously advancing supply-side structural reform and taking the initiative to adjust the relationship between supply and demand. We will cut down production capacity of crude steel by another 100 million to 150 million tons in the next five years, close more coal mines with production capacity of around 500 million tons and cut production capacity of around 500 million tons through coal mine restructuring in three to five years. This is an initiative that we are taking to cut excess capacity, adjust the economic structure and pursue steady growth so as to sustain long-term development. China has taken the most robust and solid measures in cutting excess capacity and we will honor our commitment with actions.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移推进公平共享，增进更多民众福祉。民惟邦本，本固邦宁。坚持以人民为中心，就要扎扎实实体现在经济社会发展各方面各环节。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will promote equity and sharing of development outcomes to deliver more benefits to the people. The people are the foundation of a country and only when the people lead a good life can the country thrive. We need to be people-oriented, a principle that we should follow in everything we do in advancing economic and social development.
我们将顺应人民对美好生活的向往，不断提高人民生活质量和水平，健全公共服务体系，扩大中等收入者比重。特别是要加大对困难群众精准帮扶力度，在2020年前实现现行标准下5700多万农村贫困人口全部脱贫，贫困县全部摘帽。改革开放以来，中国使7亿多人摆脱贫困，占全球减贫人口的70%以上，为世界减贫事业作出了重大贡献。中国将继续为全球反贫困作出贡献。我们将更加注重公平公正，在做大发展蛋糕的同时分好蛋糕，从人民最关心最直接最现实的利益问题出发，让百姓有更多成就感和获得感。	
We will meet the people's aspirations for a better life, raise their living standards and the quality of their lives, improve the public services system and enlarge the middle-income group. In particular, we will provide stronger and more targeted support to those living in difficulty, so that the over 57 million poor rural population below the current poverty line will all be lifted out of poverty and poverty will be alleviated in all poor counties by 2020. Since the beginning of reform and opening-up, China has lifted more than 700 million people out of poverty which accounted for over 70% of the global population living in poverty, thus making significant contribution to poverty reduction worldwide. And we will continue to contribute to the global fight against poverty. With more attention paid to equity and fairness, we will make the pie bigger and ensure that people get a fair share of it. We will resolve the most pressing problems affecting the immediate interests of the people to their satisfaction.
——在新的起点上，我们将坚定不移扩大对外开放，实现更广互利共赢。奉行互利共赢的开放战略，不断创造更全面、更深入、更多元的对外开放格局，是中国的战略选择。中国对外开放不会停滞，更不会走回头路。	
― Proceeding from the new starting point, we will open up wider to achieve greater mutual benefit and win-win outcomes. To pursue a win-win strategy of opening-up and open up China in a more comprehensive, profound and diversified way is a strategic choice of ours. China’s opening-up will not stall, still less will it reverse course.
我们将继续深入参与经济全球化进程，支持多边贸易体制。我们将加大放宽外商投资准入，提高便利化程度，促进公平开放竞争，全力营造优良营商环境。同时，我们将加快同有关国家商签自由贸易协定和投资协定，推进国内高标准自由贸易试验区建设。在有序开展人民币汇率市场化改革、逐步开放国内资本市场的同时，我们将继续推动人民币走出去，提高金融业国际化水平。	
We will continue to be fully involved in economic globalization and support the multilateral trading regime. We will expand access for foreign investment, facilitate such investment to promote fair and open competition and create a sound business environment. We will also accelerate negotiation on FTAs and investment treaties with relevant countries and the development of high-standard pilot free trade zones in China. While carrying out market-based reform of the RMB exchange rate in an orderly manner and phasing in the opening of domestic capital market, we will continue efforts to make the RMB an international currency and further internationalize China's financial sector.
中国的发展得益于国际社会，也愿为国际社会提供更多公共产品。我提出“一带一路”倡议，旨在同沿线各国分享中国发展机遇，实现共同繁荣。丝绸之路经济带一系列重点项目和经济走廊建设已经取得重要进展，21世纪海上丝绸之路建设正在同步推进。我们倡导创建的亚洲基础设施投资银行，已经开始在区域基础设施建设方面发挥积极作用。	
China's development has benefited from the international community, and we are ready to provide more public goods to the international community. I have proposed the initiative of building the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road to share China's development opportunities with countries along the Belt and Road and achieve common prosperity. Major progress has been made in launching key projects and building the economic corridors of the Silk Road Economic Belt, and the building of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is well underway. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank initiated by China has already started its positive role in regional infrastructure development.
我想特别指出，中国倡导的新机制新倡议，不是为了另起炉灶，更不是为了针对谁，而是对现有国际机制的有益补充和完善，目标是实现合作共赢、共同发展。中国对外开放，不是要一家唱独角戏，而是要欢迎各方共同参与；不是要谋求势力范围，而是要支持各国共同发展；不是要营造自己的后花园，而是要建设各国共享的百花园。	
Here, I wish to stress that the new mechanisms and initiatives launched by China are not intended to reinvent the wheels or target any other country. Rather, they aim to complement and improve the current international mechanisms to achieve win-win cooperation and common development. China's opening drive is not a one-man show. Rather, it is an invitation open to all. It is a pursuit not to establish China's own sphere of influence, but to support common development of all countries. It is meant to build not China's own backyard garden, but a garden shared by all countries.
我们落实上述改革发展举措的决心是坚定的。这些举措已经初见成效。今年上半年，中国经济增长6.7%，产业升级和结构调整步伐加快，最终消费支出对国内生产总值的贡献率达到73.4%，第三产业增加值占到国内生产总值的54.1%，居民收入稳定增长，城镇新增就业717万人。可以相信，中国的发展前景一定会越来越好，对世界的贡献一定会越来越大！	
We are firm in our resolve to implement the above-mentioned reform and development measures; and they have indeed worked. In the first half of this year, China's GDP grew by 6.7%, its industrial upgrading and structural adjustment picked up pace, the final consumption expenditure contributed 73.4% to GDP, and the added value of the tertiary industry took up 54.1% of GDP. Household income grew steadily, and 7.17 million urban jobs were created. We have reasons to believe that China will embrace even better prospects and make still greater contribution to the world.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
当前，世界经济在深度调整中曲折复苏，正处于新旧增长动能转换的关键时期。上一轮科技和产业革命提供的动能面临消退，新一轮增长动能尚在孕育。现在，保护主义抬头，国际贸易和投资低迷，多边贸易体制发展面临瓶颈，区域贸易安排丛生，导致规则碎片化。地缘政治因素错综复杂，政治安全冲突和动荡、难民危机、气候变化、恐怖主义等地区热点和全球性挑战，对世界经济的影响不容忽视。	
The world economy is now in profound adjustments and moving along a twisted path to recovery. It stands at a crucial juncture where new growth drivers are taking the place of old ones. The dynamism provided by the last round of scientific and industrial revolution is waning while new impetus for growth is still in the making. Currently, protectionism is rising; global trade and investment are sluggish; the multilateral trading regime faces bottlenecks in development, and the emergence of various regional trade arrangements have led to fragmentation of rules. Complex geopolitical factors and regional hot-spot issues as well as global challenges such as political and security conflicts and turmoil, refugee crisis, climate change and terrorism have all affected the world economy with consequences that cannot be overlooked.
面对当前世界经济的复杂形势和风险挑战，国际社会对二十国集团、对杭州峰会抱有很高期待。在去年二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会上，我提出要对世界经济把准脉、开好方。中方希望同各方一道，推动杭州峰会开出一剂标本兼治、综合施策的药方，推动世界经济走上强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长之路。	
Against such complex situation as well as risks and challenges facing the world economy, the international community has high expectations on the G20 and the Hangzhou Summit. At the G20 Antalya Summit last year, I proposed that we make an accurate assessment of the health of the world economy and give right prescriptions. China will work with other parties to ensure that the Hangzhou Summit comes up with an integrated prescription to address both the symptoms and root causes so that the world economy could move along a path of strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth.
第一，建设创新型世界经济，开辟增长源泉。创新是从根本上打开增长之锁的钥匙。以互联网为核心的新一轮科技和产业革命蓄势待发，人工智能、虚拟现实等新技术日新月异，虚拟经济与实体经济的结合，将给人们的生产方式和生活方式带来革命性变化。这种变化不会一蹴而就，也不会一帆风顺，需要各国合力推动，在充分放大和加速其正面效应的同时，把可能出现的负面影响降到最低。	
First, we need to build an innovative world economy to generate new drivers of growth. Innovation holds the key to fundamentally unleashing the growth potential. The new round of scientific and industrial revolution with Internet at its core is gathering momentum, and new technologies such as artificial intelligence and virtual reality are developing by leaps and bounds. The combination of the virtual economy and the real economy will bring revolutionary changes to our way of work and way of life. Such changes will not take place overnight or be problem-free. They require all countries to work together to maximize and quicken their positive effects while minimizing the potential negative impacts.
中方把创新增长方式设定为杭州峰会重点议题，推动制定《二十国集团创新增长蓝图》，目的就是要向创新要动力，向改革要活力，把握创新、新科技革命和产业变革、数字经济的历史性机遇，提升世界经济中长期增长潜力。这是二十国集团首次围绕创新采取行动，我们要把各国实施创新政策的力量汇集一处，做到理念上有共识、行动上有计划、机制上有保障。我们要针对全球经济增长低迷的突出问题，在宏观经济政策上进行创新，把财政货币和结构性改革政策有效组合起来。	
China has made "breaking a new path for growth" one of the major agenda items of the Hangzhou Summit and has worked for the formulation of a G20 Blueprint on Innovative Growth. What we want to achieve is to seek impetus through innovation and vitality through reform. We need to seize the historic opportunity presented by innovation, new scientific and technological revolution, industrial transformation and digital economy to increase medium- and long-term growth potential of the world economy. This will be the first time that the G20 takes action on innovation. It is important for us to pool together the strength of innovation-oriented policies of individual countries and make sure that our action is guided with conceptual consensus, and implemented according to concrete action plans with sufficient institutional guarantee. In light of the pronounced issue of lackluster global economic growth, we need to innovate our macroeconomic policies and effectively combine fiscal and monetary policies with structural reform policies.
第二，建设开放型世界经济，拓展发展空间。世界经济发展的历史证明，开放带来进步，封闭导致落后。重回以邻为壑的老路，不仅无法摆脱自身危机和衰退，而且会收窄世界经济共同空间，导致“双输”局面。	
Second, we need to build an open world economy to expand the scope of development. The path of world economic development shows that openness brings progress and isolation leads to backwardness. To repeat the beggar-thy-neighbor approach will not help any country get out of the crisis or recession. It only narrows the space for common development in the world economy and will lead to a "lose-lose" scenario.
“轻关易道，通商宽农。”这是建设开放型世界经济的应有之义。中方把贸易和投资摆上二十国集团重要议程。我们推动二十国集团加强贸易和投资机制建设，制定全球贸易增长战略和全球投资指导原则，巩固多边贸易体制，重申反对保护主义承诺。我们希望通过这些举措，为各国发展营造更大市场和空间，重振贸易和投资这两大引擎。	
According to the teaching of Chinese classics, "The governance of a country should be based on simple customs procedures, improved infrastructure, convenience for business transactions and preferential agricultural policies." What it implies is the importance of building an open world economy. China has put trade and investment high on the G20 agenda. We support the G20’s efforts as it endeavors to strengthen institution-building in trade and investment, formulate the strategy for global trade growth as well as the guiding principles for global investment policy-making, consolidate the multilateral trading regime and reaffirm its commitment against protectionism. We hope that these measures will open up greater market and scope for the development of individual countries and help revitalize trade and investment, the two major engines of growth.
第三，建设联动型世界经济，凝聚互动合力。在经济全球化时代，各国发展环环相扣，一荣俱荣，一损俱损。没有哪一个国家可以独善其身，协调合作是必然选择。我们要在世界经济共振中实现联动发展。	
Third, we need to build an interconnected world economy to forge interactive synergy. In the age of economic globalization, countries are closely linked in their development and they all rise and fall together. No country could seek development on its own; and the one sure path is through coordination and cooperation. We need to realize interconnected development by promoting common development of the world economy.
我们应该加强政策规则的联动，一方面通过宏观经济政策协调放大正面外溢效应，减少负面外部影响，另一方面倡导交流互鉴，解决制度、政策、标准不对称问题。我们应该夯实基础设施的联动，中方发起全球基础设施互联互通联盟倡议，推动多边开发银行发表联合愿景声明，加大对基础设施项目的资金投入和智力支持，以加速全球基础设施互联互通进程。我们应该增进利益共赢的联动，推动构建和优化全球价值链，扩大各方参与，打造全球增长共赢链。	
We need to increase the interconnection of our rules and policies. We need to maximize the positive spillovers and minimize the negative external impacts through coordination of our macroeconomic policies. At the same time, we also need to encourage mutual learning to address asymmetries in systems, policies and standards. We need to enhance the interconnection of our infrastructure. China has put forward the global infrastructure connectivity alliance initiative to encourage multilateral development banks to adopt joint declaration of aspirations and give greater funds and intellectual support to infrastructure projects to speed up the process of global infrastructure connectivity. We need to promote win-win interconnection, foster and improve the global value chain and increase the participation of parties concerned so as to create a chain of win-win global growth.
第四，建设包容型世界经济，夯实共赢基础。消除贫困和饥饿，推动包容和可持续发展，不仅是国际社会的道义责任，也能释放出不可估量的有效需求。据有关统计，现在世界基尼系数已经达到0.7左右，超过了公认的0.6“危险线”，必须引起我们的高度关注。同时，全球产业结构调整给不同产业和群体带来了冲击。我们要正视和妥善处理这一问题，努力让经济全球化更具包容性。	
Fourth, we need to build an inclusive world economy to strengthen the foundation for win-win outcomes. We need to eradicate poverty and hunger and advance inclusive and sustainable development. This is not just a moral responsibility of the international community. It also helps unleash immeasurable effective demand. According to relevant statistics, the world's Gini coefficient has reached around 0.7, higher than the recognized alarm level which stands at 0.6. This is something we must pay great attention to. At the same time, global industrial restructuring has had its impact on different industries and communities. We need to face this issue squarely and properly handle it in order to make economic globalization more inclusive.
为实现上述目标，今年二十国集团首次把发展问题置于全球宏观政策框架核心位置，首次就落实2030年可持续发展议程制定行动计划，首次就支持非洲国家和最不发达国家工业化开展合作，具有开创性意义。各方一致承诺推动气候变化《巴黎协定》尽快生效。我们还就能源可及性、能效、可再生能源、创业制定共同行动计划，加强粮食安全和农业合作。我们关心不同阶层和群体特别是困难群众的需求，推动各国讨论公共管理和再分配政策调整。	
To realize the above goal, this year's G20 has, for the first time, put the issue of development front and center of the global macro policy framework. The first action plan has been formulated for implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and for the first time, cooperation is being carried out to support African countries and LDCs in their industrialization. All these are moves of pioneering significance. The parties have all committed themselves to working for an early entry into force of the Paris Agreement on climate change. We have also formulated joint action plans on energy accessibility, energy efficiency, renewable energy and entrepreneurship, and have strengthened cooperation on food security and agriculture. We care for the needs of different social strata and communities, especially the needy, and encourage discussions among countries concerned on public administration and adjustment of redistribution policies.
我们希望向国际社会传递这样一个信号：二十国集团不仅属于二十个成员，也属于全世界。我们的目标是让增长和发展惠及所有国家和人民，让各国人民特别是发展中国家人民的日子都一天天好起来！	
We hope to convey a message to the international community that the G20 works for the interest of not just its 20 members, but the whole world. We will work to ensure that growth and development benefit all countries and peoples and that the livelihood of all people, especially those in developing countries, will get better day by day.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
一个行动胜过一打纲领。二十国集团成员应该同国际社会一道坚定信念、立即行动，从以下方面作出努力。	
One action counts more than a dozen programs. I believe G20 members should join other members of international community and act immediately and in good faith in the following aspects:
第一，共同维护和平稳定的国际环境。历史一再证明，没有和平就没有发展，没有稳定就没有繁荣。各国安全紧密相关，没有哪个国家可以独善其身，也没有哪个国家可以包打天下。抛弃过时的冷战思维，树立共同、综合、合作、可持续的新安全观是当务之急。我们呼吁各国珍惜难能可贵的和平和安宁，为维护全球和地区稳定发挥建设性作用。各国都应该坚持联合国宪章宗旨和原则，坚持多边主义，通过对话协商解决分歧和争端，寻求而不是破坏共识，化解而不是制造矛盾，推动国际秩序朝着更加公正合理的方向发展。	
First, we can work together to build a peaceful and stable international environment. History has proven time and again that without peace, there will be no development and without stability, there will be no prosperity. Countries are all closely linked in their security. No country can develop solely on its own or resolve all problems without working with others. It is important to reject the outdated Cold War mentality and build a new concept of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security. We call on all countries to cherish the hard-won peace and tranquility and play a constructive role in maintaining global and regional stability. All countries should uphold the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, adhere to multilateralism, settle disagreements and disputes through dialogue and consultation, seek consensus and dissolve tensions rather than doing the opposite and make the international order more just and equitable.
和衷共济、和合共生是中华民族的历史基因，也是东方文明的精髓。中国坚定不移走和平发展道路。国强必霸的逻辑不适用，穷兵黩武的道路走不通。中国是联合国安理会常任理事国中派遣维和人员最多的国家，不久前在马里和南苏丹牺牲的联合国维和人员中就有中国人民的优秀儿子。我们将继续履行好国际义务，始终做世界和平的建设者和维护者。
To seek harmony and coexistence is in the genes of the Chinese nation throughout history. It represents the very essence of Eastern civilization. China is committed to the path of peaceful development. The logic that a strong country is bound to seek hegemony no longer applies and the willful use of force will lead to nowhere. China is the biggest contributor of peacekeepers among the permanent members of the UN Security Council. The proud sons of the Chinese people are among the UN peacekeepers that gave their lives to the mission of peace in Mali and South Sudan not long ago. China will continue to fulfill its international obligations and serve as the builder and defender of world peace.
第二，共同构建合作共赢的全球伙伴关系。在经济全球化的今天，没有与世隔绝的孤岛。同为地球村居民，我们要树立人类命运共同体意识。伙伴精神是二十国集团最宝贵的财富，也是各国共同应对全球性挑战的选择。	
Second, we can work together to build a global partnership for win-win cooperation. In the era of economic globalization, there is no island completely cut off from the rest of the world. As members of the global village, we need to cultivate the awareness of a community of shared future for mankind. Partnership is the most valuable asset of the G20 and the choice of all countries as they rise up together to global challenges.
我们应该求同存异、聚同化异，共同构建合作共赢的新型国际关系。国家不论大小、强弱、贫富，都应该平等相待，既把自己发展好，也帮助其他国家发展好。大家都好，世界才能更美好。	
We need to seek common ground while shelving and narrowing differences in an effort to build a new type of international relations featuring win-win cooperation. All countries, big or small, strong or weak, rich or poor, must treat each other as equals. We need to help each other achieve sound development as we work to ensure our own development. The world will be a better place only when everyone is better off.
我们应该加强在重大全球性问题上的沟通和协调，为实现世界和平、稳定、繁荣提供更多公共产品。我们应该建立健全宏观经济政策协调机制，考虑国内政策的联动效应和传导影响，推动正面而非负面溢出效应。我们应该以伙伴关系为依托，秉持共赢理念，加强各领域务实合作，不断扩大合作内涵和外延，推动取得符合人民期待的合作成果。我们应该促进不同国家、不同文化和历史背景的人们深入交流，增进彼此理解，携手构建人类命运共同体。	
We need to step up communication and coordination on major global issues and provide more public goods for the fostering of a peaceful, stable and prosperous world. We need to institute and steadily improve macroeconomic policy coordination mechanisms, be mindful of the related and chain effects of our domestic policies and ensure their positive rather than negative spillovers. We need to rely on partnerships, uphold the vision of win-win results, step up practical cooperation across the board, continue to enrich and expand cooperation and ensure that such cooperation delivers outcomes to meet people's expectations. We need to enable people of different countries, cultures and historical backgrounds to deepen exchanges, enhance mutual understanding and jointly build a community of shared future for mankind.
第三，共同完善全球经济治理。常言说，小智治事，大智治制。面对世界经济形势的发展演变，全球经济治理需要与时俱进、因时而变。全球经济治理应该以平等为基础，更好反映世界经济格局新现实，增加新兴市场国家和发展中国家代表性和发言权，确保各国在国际经济合作中权利平等、机会平等、规则平等。	
Third, we can work together to improve global economic governance. As a Chinese saying goes, people with petty shrewdness attend to trivial matters while those with greater wisdom attend to governance of institutions. As the world economic situation changes, it is necessary that global economic governance remains relevant and adaptive to the changing times. Global economic governance should be based on equality, better reflect the new realities of the world economic landscape, increase the representation and voice of emerging markets and developing countries and ensure that all countries have equal rights, equal opportunities and equal rules to follow in international economic cooperation.
全球经济治理应该以开放为导向，坚持理念、政策、机制开放，适应形势变化，广纳良言，充分听取社会各界建议和诉求，鼓励各方积极参与和融入，不搞排他性安排，防止治理机制封闭化和规则碎片化。全球经济治理应该以合作为动力，全球性挑战需要全球性应对，合作是必然选择，各国要加强沟通和协调，照顾彼此利益关切，共商规则，共建机制，共迎挑战。全球经济治理应该以共享为目标，提倡所有人参与，所有人受益，不搞一家独大或者赢者通吃，而是寻求利益共享，实现共赢目标。	
Global economic governance should embrace openness. It should be based on open concepts, open policies and open mechanisms so as to adapt to the changing situation. It should be open to constructive suggestions and the recommendations and aspirations of different quarters of society. It should encourage active participation and integration of various parties, reject exclusive arrangements and avoid closed governance mechanisms and fragmentation of rules. Global economic governance should be driven by cooperation, as global challenges require global responses, and cooperation is the necessary choice. Countries need to step up communication and coordination, accommodate each other's interests and concerns, and work together to discuss the rules, build mechanisms and meet challenges. Global economic governance should be a mechanism of sharing. It should be about participation by all and benefits for all. Instead of seeking dominance or winner-takes-all results, it should encourage the sharing of interests and win-win prospects.
当前形势下，全球经济治理特别要抓住以下重点：共同构建公正高效的全球金融治理格局，维护世界经济稳定大局；共同构建开放透明的全球贸易和投资治理格局，巩固多边贸易体制，释放全球经贸投资合作潜力；共同构建绿色低碳的全球能源治理格局，推动全球绿色发展合作；共同构建包容联动的全球发展治理格局，以落实联合国2030年可持续发展议程为目标，共同增进全人类福祉！	
At this stage, global economic governance should focus on the following: jointly ensure equitable and efficient global financial governance and uphold the overall stability of the world economy; jointly foster open and transparent global trade and investment governance to cement the multilateral trading regime and unleash the potential of global cooperation in economy, trade and investment; jointly establish green and low-carbon global energy governance to promote global green development cooperation; and jointly facilitate an inclusive and interconnected global development governance to implement the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and jointly advance the well-being of mankind.
二十国集团领导人峰会已经举行10届，正处在关键发展节点上。中方主办杭州峰会的目标之一，是推动二十国集团实现从短期政策向中长期政策转型，从危机应对向长效治理机制转型，巩固其作为全球经济治理重要平台的地位。	
Since the G20 has convened ten summits, it has come to a crucial juncture of development. One of the goals of China's G20 Presidency is to enable the G20 to transform from a crisis response mechanism focusing on short-term policies to one of long-term governance that shapes medium- to long-term policies, and solidify its role as the premier forum for international economic governance.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
工商界是促进增长的生力军。中方把工商峰会安排在领导人峰会前夕举行，就是要充分汇集工商界的思想和智慧。我高兴地看到，二十国集团工商界人士积极参与全年会议进程，同其他各界人士一道，针对二十国集团关注重点，围绕金融促增长、贸易和投资、基础设施建设、中小企业发展、就业、反腐败等议题提出意见和建议，为二十国集团政策制定提供了重要参考，为杭州峰会作出了积极贡献。	The business community is the main driver of growth. By convening the B20 Summit on the eve of the G20 Summit, China wishes to fully pool the ideas and wisdom of the business community. I am pleased to see that the business people from G20 countries have taken an active part in the G20 process throughout the year. Together with people of other communities, you have presented your views and suggestions on financing growth, trade and investment, infrastructure, SME development, employment, anti-corruption and other subjects of G20 priorities. You have provided important recommendations for G20 policy making and contributed positively to the Hangzhou Summit.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！	
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Dear Friends,
这几天，正值钱塘江大潮，“弄潮儿向涛头立。手把红旗旗不湿。”我同各位一样，期待着二十国集团勇做世界经济的弄潮儿。相信在各方一道努力下，杭州峰会一定能够取得成功！	The tidal bore is sweeping up the Qiantang River these few days. As an ancient Chinese poem reads, "The tide riders surf the currents; the flags they hold up never get wet". I, like all of you, look forward to a G20 that will ride the tides in the world economy. I believe that, with various parties working together, the Hangzhou Summit will certainly achieve success.
最后，我祝这次工商峰会取得圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish the B20 Summit a full success.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.