88. 习近平在捷克媒体发表署名文章《奏响中捷关系的时代强音》
奏响中捷关系的时代强音
中华人民共和国主席 习近平
Time to Renew and Energize China-Czech Ties
For the Pravo by Chinese President Xi Jinping
应泽曼总统邀请，我将对捷克共和国进行国事访问。这是我担任中国国家主席后首次访问捷克。我期待同泽曼总统和捷克其他领导人就新形势下提高中捷关系发展水平以及重大国际和地区问题深入交换意见。	
At the invitation of President Milos Zeman, I will be paying my first state visit to the Czech Republic as the Chinese President. I look forward to having in-depth exchange of views with President Zeman and other Czech leaders on boosting bilateral ties and on major international and regional issues.
捷克人杰地灵，山川秀美，人文历史底蕴深厚。上世纪90年代，我曾经到访捷克，勤劳智慧的捷克人民、蓬勃开展的捷克经济社会建设、伏尔塔瓦河孕育的波西米亚文明都给我留下了深刻印象。	
The Czech Republic is known for picturesque landscape, rich cultural heritage and talented people. I visited this country in the 1990s and was deeply impressed by the hard work and ingenuity of the Czech people, dynamic economic and social progress and the Bohemian culture nourished by the Vltava river.
捷克是最早承认并同新中国建交的国家之一。建交67年来，中捷两国和两国人民传统友谊不断加深。上世纪50年代，捷克著名画家斯克莱纳尔到访中国，同吴作人、齐白石等中国美术大师结下友好情谊。斯克莱纳尔回到捷克后创作了许多《美猴王》画作，被称作孙悟空的第七十三种变化。《鼹鼠的故事》是最早进入中国的动画片。小鼹鼠憨态可掬、善良勇敢的卡通形象深受中国广大少年儿童喜爱。音乐大师斯美塔那创作的交响诗套曲《我的祖国》和文学家哈谢克的著作《好兵帅克》在中国广为人知。	
The Czech Republic is one of the first countries to recognize and establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China. Since the establishment of diplomatic ties 67 years ago, the traditional friendship between our countries and peoples has gone from strength to strength. In the 1950s, a well-known Czech painter Zdenek Sklenar came to China and became good friends with Wu Zuoren, Qi Baishi and other renowned Chinese painters. After returning to his country, Zdenek Sklenar drew many illustrations of Monkey King, regarded fondly as a unique variation of the image of this popular character. Krtek is the first foreign cartoon series introduced to China. The chubby, kind-hearted and courageous little mole became immensely popular among China's young audience. Bedrich Smetana's symphonic cycle Ma Vlast and Jaroslav Hasek's The Good Soldier Svejk are also familiar masterpieces to the Chinese public.
近年来，中捷关系发展驶入快车道。两年内，我同泽曼总统4度会面，就加强两国高层交往、深化战略互信、提升各领域交流合作水平达成广泛共识。2015年年底，双方签署关于共同推进“一带一路”建设的政府间谅解备忘录，为两国各领域交流合作开辟了更加广阔的空间。	
In recent years, China-Czech relations entered a period of fast growth. In a short span of two years, President Zeman and I met four times and reached broad common understanding on strengthening high-level exchanges, deepening strategic mutual trust and intensifying exchanges and cooperation across the board. At the end of 2015, the two governments signed an MOU on jointly promoting the "Belt and Road" initiative, which created even wider prospects for bilateral exchanges and cooperation in all fields.
中国连续多年是捷克在欧盟外第一大贸易伙伴，捷克是中国在中东欧地区第二大贸易伙伴。2015年，中捷双边贸易额达到110亿美元。中捷核电、金融、航空、科技、农业等领域合作日新月异，合作水平和规模不断提升。两国多家企业到对方国家投资兴业，业务发展迅速。	
For many years in a row, China has been the Czech Republic's largest trading partner outside the European Union and the Czech Republic China's second largest trading partner in Central and Eastern Europe. In 2015, our bilateral trade topped 11 billion U.S. dollars. Our cooperation in nuclear power, finance, aviation, science and technology and agriculture scaled new heights both in level and scale. Many Chinese and Czech companies have investments and booming business operations in each other's countries.
中捷人文交流活力迸发。捷克已经成为中国游客憧憬和向往的旅游目的地。2015年，来捷克旅游的中国游客总数突破30万人次，创历史新高。旅游合作已经成为中捷交流合作的一张亮丽“名片”。中东欧首家中医中心在捷克落户。中捷影视合作方兴未艾。中国将举办2022年冬奥会，为双方加强体育交流提供了良好机遇。	
Our people-to-people and cultural exchanges are flourishing. The Czech Republic is an attractive destination to Chinese tourists, who made a record number of more than 300,000 visits here in 2015, making tourism a bright spot in China-Czech cooperation. Today, the Czech Republic hosts the first traditional Chinese medicine research center in Central and Eastern Europe. Cooperation on film and TV production is gaining momentum. The 2022 Winter Olympics to be held in China also offers a great opportunity for sports exchanges between our two countries.
这次访问也是我担任国家主席后第一次访问中东欧国家。中国同中东欧国家有着源远流长的深厚友谊。得益于双方的强烈政治意愿和良好的民意基础，中国－中东欧国家合作（“16+1合作”）应运而生，方兴未艾。4年来，中国同中东欧国家一道，本着相互尊重、互利共赢、包容开放的原则，建机制、搭平台、促合作，共同推动“16+1合作”逐渐步入成熟期和早期收获期。中国同中东欧国家开展共建“一带一路”合作以及中欧不断加强战略对接，为“16+1合作”汇聚了更为蓬勃的动力，开辟了更为广阔的空间。	
This visit also marks my first trip to a Central and Eastern European country (CEEC) as China's president. With our deep-rooted friendship, political good-will and popular support as a strong basis, China and CEECs launched "16+1" cooperation, which has since made solid progress. Over the past four years, under the principles of mutual respect, mutual benefit, inclusiveness and openness, China and CEECs have built new cooperation mechanisms and platforms. Thanks to these efforts, China-CEECs cooperation is entering a maturing phase and delivering early harvests. Our cooperation on the "Belt and Road" initiative and efforts to strengthen synergy between China and the EU in their development strategies will create even greater impetus and potential for "16+1" cooperation.
欧盟是中国的全面战略伙伴。2014年3月，我访问欧盟总部期间，同欧方领导人一道决定打造中欧和平、增长、改革、文明四大伙伴关系，为新时期中欧关系指明了战略方向。2015年中欧建交40周年之际，双方决定推进“一带一路”倡议同欧洲投资计划等发展战略对接，组建中欧共同投资基金、互联互通平台等，进一步确立了中欧务实合作的新框架。中欧关系正处于历史发展最好时期，面临前所未有的历史机遇。	
The EU is China's comprehensive strategic partner. In March 2014, during my visit to the EU headquarters, the EU leaders and I agreed to develop partnerships for peace, growth, reform and civilization, pointing the strategic direction for China-EU relations. Last year, marking the 40th anniversary of diplomatic ties, the two sides decided to promote synergy between the "Belt and Road" initiative and the Investment Plan for Europe and set up the China-EU co-investment vehicle and the Connectivity Platform, broadening the new framework of China-EU practical cooperation. China-EU relations are at their best period in history and are presented with unprecedented historic opportunities of further growth.
当前，中欧双方都在推进结构性改革，激发经济社会发展活力。中国人民正在为全面建成小康社会、实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而不懈努力。不久前颁布实施的中国国民经济和社会发展第十三个五年规划纲要，贯彻创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念，致力于稳增长、转方式、调结构，努力在未来5年保持经济中高速增长。欧盟正致力于保持经济复苏势头，大力提升欧盟经济发展竞争力。在此背景下，中欧双方发展战略契合度高、合作潜力巨大、前景广阔。中国愿同欧盟一道，发扬同舟共济、合作共赢的精神，共同为世界经济发展贡献力量。	
China and the EU are both deepening structural reforms to unleash greater social and economic vitality. People in China are now striving to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects, advance towards the "two centenary goals" of development (i.e. to double 2010 GDP and per capita income and finish the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by the time the CPC celebrates its centenary in 2021 and to turn the PRC into a modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced and harmonious by the time it celebrates its centenary in 2049) and realize the Chinese dream of national rejuvenation. The Outline of the 13th Five-Year Plan for Social and Economic Development, which was recently promulgated, calls for innovative, coordinated, green, open and inclusive development and sets forth the targets of maintaining stable growth, upgrading the growth model and economic structure, aiming at a medium-to-high growth speed for the coming five years. The EU is working to keep the momentum of economic recovery and boost its economic competitiveness. Such a high complementarity in our development strategies and great potential of our cooperation hold out great promise for the future of China-EU relations. China will join hands with the EU for win-win cooperation, and together contribute to world economic development.
中国－中东欧国家合作和中欧关系的发展需要依靠双边关系的有力支撑。当前，中捷两国面临着双边关系发展的重要历史机遇。我期待通过这次访问，同捷克领导人一道，提高双边关系水平，推动“16+1合作”以及中欧关系不断向前发展。	
China-CEECs cooperation and China-EU relations need to be underpinned by strong bilateral relationships. This is an opportune time for the development of China-Czech relations. I look forward to working with Czech leaders to further enhance bilateral relations and push for new progress in "16+1" cooperation and China-EU relations.
——加强政治互信，指明发展方向。“求木之长者，必固其根本。”中捷双方应该适时提高双边关系定位，坚持从战略高度和长远角度看待双边关系，本着互相尊重、平等相待的原则，坚定支持对方的核心利益和重大关切，确保中捷关系长期健康稳定发展，牢牢把握两国关系发展的大方向。	
-- We should enhance political mutual trust and establish a clear direction for the development of our ties. As people say in China, a tree can grow tall only when its roots are strong. China and the Czech Republic should consider upgrading the bilateral relationship in due time, adopt a strategic and long-term perspective, follow the principle of mutual respect and equality, and render firm support to each other on issues concerning our core interests and major concerns, to ensure long-term sound and stable development of bilateral ties and set the right direction for our relations.
——加强战略对接，释放合作潜力。中捷双方应该以签署共同推进“一带一路”建设政府间谅解备忘录为重要契机，加强各自发展战略和愿景的对接，进一步梳理和筹备重大合作项目，争取早期收获。	
-- We should better align our development strategies to tap the potential of cooperation. The MOU of cooperation on the joint development of the "Belt and Road" between China and the Czech Republic offers fresh opportunity for the two countries to better align our development strategies and plans, and prepare the ground for identifying major cooperation projects for early harvest.
——加强经贸合作，惠及两国民众。经过30多年的改革开放，中国在资金、技术、装备方面已经形成较大优势，特别是在铁路、核电建设等领域优势明显。捷克位于欧洲心脏地带，地理位置优越，工业基础雄厚，在机械加工、汽车制造、航空等领域具有独特优势。中方愿同捷方一道，以制造业为基础推进产能合作，带动金融、通信、智能工业、纳米、环保等各领域务实合作，让两国民众分享更多互利合作成果。	
-- We should enhance economic cooperation for the benefit of our people. More than 30 years of reform and opening-up has sharpened China's competitive edge in terms of capital, technology and equipment, especially in railway and nuclear plant construction. Situated in the heartland of Europe, the Czech Republic enjoys advantageous location, strong industrial foundation and unique strengths in machining, automobile manufacturing and aero-industry. China hopes to cooperate with the Czech side to carry out industrial capacity cooperation in the manufacturing sector, and on that basis, expand practical cooperation in such areas as finance, telecommunications, smart industry, nano technology and environmental protection, to deliver greater fruits of this mutually beneficial cooperation to our two peoples.
——加强人文交流，赋予时代内涵。中捷两国人民素来互相欣赏对方的文明、文化，近年来更是不断掀起交流高潮。我们要继续扩大文化、教育、影视、旅游、卫生等领域人文交流，鼓励青年和学生交往，让两国人民的传统友谊世代相传、历久弥新。	
-- We should encourage people-to-people and cultural exchanges. The Chinese and Czech peoples have long admired and appreciated each other's civilization and culture, and such exchanges have boomed in recent years. We should expand exchanges in culture, education, film and television, tourism and health sectors, encourage young people and students to interact more with each other to renew our traditional friendship.
——加强区域合作，用好广阔平台。捷克一直积极支持和参与中国－中东欧国家合作，在卫生、地方合作等方面一直走在中东欧国家前列，在“16+1合作”中发挥了积极重要作用。我们愿同包括捷克在内的中东欧国家一道，为做大做强“16+1合作”共同努力。	
-- We should step up regional cooperation by bringing into play the role of multilateral platforms. The Czech Republic has actively supported and participated in China-CEECs cooperation, demonstrating its important role by spearheading health cooperation and cooperation at sub-national levels. We hope to work together with the Czech Republic and other CEECs to make the "16+1" a premier framework for regional cooperation.
——加强中欧合作，共建美好未来。中欧双方应当顺应和平、发展、合作、共赢的时代潮流，不断深化各自发展战略对接，加强在国际舞台上的沟通和协调，携手努力，推动中欧全面战略伙伴关系不断迈上新台阶。	
-- We should strengthen China-EU cooperation for a better future. China and the EU should follow the trend of peace, development and win-win cooperation, further synergize development strategies, enhance communication and coordination in the international arena and work for new progress of the China-EU comprehensive strategic partnership.
让我们齐心协力，奏响中捷关系时代强音，共同创造中国－中东欧国家合作以及中欧关系更加美好的明天。	
Let us work together to renew and energize the development of China-Czech ties and usher in a bright new era of China-CEECs cooperation and China-EU relations.