95. 习近平在世界互联网大会上发表主旨演讲
尊敬的侯赛因总统，
尊敬的梅德韦杰夫总理，
尊敬的马西莫夫总理，
尊敬的萨里耶夫总理，
尊敬的拉苏尔佐达总理，
尊敬的阿齐莫夫第一副总理，
尊敬的索瓦莱尼副首相，
尊敬的吴红波副秘书长，
尊敬的赵厚麟秘书长，
尊敬的施瓦布先生，
各位部长，各位大使，
各位嘉宾，各位朋友：	
President Mamnoon Hussain,
Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev,
Prime Minister Karim Massimov,
Prime Minister Temir Sariyev,
Prime Minister Qohir Rasulzoda,
First Deputy Prime Minister Rustam Azimov,
Deputy Prime Minister Siaosi Sovaleni,
Under-Secretary-General Wu Hongbo,
Secretary-General Zhao Houlin,
Dr. Klaus Schwab,
Ministers and Ambassadors,
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
欢迎各位嘉宾来到美丽的乌镇，共商世界互联网发展大计。首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人的名义，对各位嘉宾出席第二届世界互联网大会，表示热烈的欢迎！对大会的召开，表示热烈的祝贺！	
Welcome to the beautiful town of Wuzhen for this important discussion on the development of the Internet in the world. First of all, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, I wish to extend our warm welcome to all participants to the second World Internet Conference, and express warm congratulations on the opening of the conference.
我曾在浙江工作多年，多次来过乌镇。今天再次来到这里，既感到亲切熟悉，又感到耳目一新。去年，首届世界互联网大会在这里举办，推动了网络创客、网上医院、智慧旅游等快速发展，让这个白墙黛瓦的千年古镇焕发出新的魅力。乌镇的网络化、智慧化，是传统和现代、人文和科技融合发展的生动写照，是中国互联网创新发展的一个缩影，也生动体现了全球互联网共享发展的理念。	
I have worked in Zhejiang for many years and visited Wuzhen on several occasions. Today, coming back to Wuzhen, I find the town both familiar and new. The first World Internet Conference held here last year gave a strong boost to the development of online maker, online hospital, smart tourism and other Internet applications, and added a new, fascinating dimension to the charm of this historical town. An Internet-empowered and smart town, Wuzhen is a vivid example of what can be achieved by combining tradition with modernity and integrating culture with science. It showcases the innovative development of the Internet in China and reflects the principle that global Internet development is indeed shared by all.
纵观世界文明史，人类先后经历了农业革命、工业革命、信息革命。每一次产业技术革命，都给人类生产生活带来巨大而深刻的影响。现在，以互联网为代表的信息技术日新月异，引领了社会生产新变革，创造了人类生活新空间，拓展了国家治理新领域，极大提高了人类认识世界、改造世界的能力。互联网让世界变成了“鸡犬之声相闻”的地球村，相隔万里的人们不再“老死不相往来”。可以说，世界因互联网而更多彩，生活因互联网而更丰富。
Looking at the history of world civilizations, humanity has progressed along with agricultural, industrial and information revolutions. Each of these industrial and technological revolutions has had great and profound impact on our way of production and life. Today, information technologies represented by the Internet are experiencing rapid changes with each passing day. They have brought about new ways of social production, created new space for people's life, opened new horizons of state governance, and enhanced our ability to understand and shape the world. The Internet has turned the world into a global village where distance no longer prevents people from interacting with each other. Communication is made easier than ever before. Indeed, thanks to the Internet, our world has become more colorful and people now live a fuller life.
中国正处在信息化快速发展的历史进程之中。中国高度重视互联网发展，自21年前接入国际互联网以来，我们按照积极利用、科学发展、依法管理、确保安全的思路，加强信息基础设施建设，发展网络经济，推进信息惠民。同时，我们依法开展网络空间治理，网络空间日渐清朗。目前，中国有6.7亿网民、413万多家网站，网络深度融入经济社会发展、融入人民生活。	
China is going through a historic process of rapid application of information technologies. China attaches great importance to Internet development. Since China was connected to World Wide Web 21 years ago, we have, in keeping with the principles of proactive utilization, rational development, law-based regulation and assurance of security, strengthened IT infrastructure, developed cyber economy and made life better for our people through IT application. In the meantime, we have conducted governance of cyberspace in accordance with law, and ensured a clean environment in the cyberspace. Today, China is already home to 670 million Internet users and over 4.13 million websites. The Internet is now deeply integrated into China's economic and social development and the life of the Chinese people.
中共十八届五中全会提出了创新、协调、绿色、开放、共享的发展理念。“十三五”时期，中国将大力实施网络强国战略、国家大数据战略、“互联网+”行动计划，发展积极向上的网络文化，拓展网络经济空间，促进互联网和经济社会融合发展。我们的目标，就是要让互联网发展成果惠及13亿多中国人民，更好造福各国人民。	
The Fifth Plenum of the 18th CPC Central Committee has put forward the concept of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. During the 13th Five-Year Plan period, China will vigorously implement the national cyber development strategy, the national big data strategy and the "Internet Plus" action plan. We will develop an uplifting cyber culture, open up more space for cyber economy, and promote the integration of Internet development with economic and social progress. Our goal is to ensure that the more than 1.3 billion Chinese people and people across the world can all enjoy the benefits of Internet development.
各位嘉宾、各位朋友！	
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
随着世界多极化、经济全球化、文化多样化、社会信息化深入发展，互联网对人类文明进步将发挥更大促进作用。同时，互联网领域发展不平衡、规则不健全、秩序不合理等问题日益凸显。不同国家和地区信息鸿沟不断拉大，现有网络空间治理规则难以反映大多数国家意愿和利益；世界范围内侵害个人隐私、侵犯知识产权、网络犯罪等时有发生，网络监听、网络攻击、网络恐怖主义活动等成为全球公害。面对这些问题和挑战，国际社会应该在相互尊重、相互信任的基础上，加强对话合作，推动互联网全球治理体系变革，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间，建立多边、民主、透明的全球互联网治理体系。	
With the deepening of world multi-polarity, economic globalization, cultural diversity and IT application, the Internet will only play a bigger role in the progress of human civilization. At the same time, however, such problems as unbalanced development, inadequate rules and inequitable order have become more evident in the field of the Internet. The information gap between different countries and regions is widening, and the existing rules governing the cyberspace hardly reflect the desires and interests of the majority of countries. Infringements of individual privacy and intellectual property rights as well as cyber crimes happen from time to time around the world. Cyber surveillance, cyber attack and cyber terrorism have become a global scourge. In the face of these problems and challenges, the international community must enhance dialogue and cooperation on the basis of mutual respect and trust, promote transformation of the global Internet governance system, and work together to foster a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cyberspace and put in place a multilateral, democratic and transparent global Internet governance system.
推进全球互联网治理体系变革，应该坚持以下原则。	
To make progress in the transformation of the global Internet governance system, the following principles must be upheld:
——尊重网络主权。《联合国宪章》确立的主权平等原则是当代国际关系的基本准则，覆盖国与国交往各个领域，其原则和精神也应该适用于网络空间。我们应该尊重各国自主选择网络发展道路、网络管理模式、互联网公共政策和平等参与国际网络空间治理的权利，不搞网络霸权，不干涉他国内政，不从事、纵容或支持危害他国国家安全的网络活动。
- Respect for cyber sovereignty. The principle of sovereign equality enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations is one of the basic norms in contemporary international relations. It covers all aspects of state-to-state relations, which also includes cyberspace. We should respect the right of individual countries to independently choose their own path of cyber development, model of cyber regulation and Internet public policies, and participate in international cyberspace governance on an equal footing. No country should pursue cyber hegemony, interfere in other countries' internal affairs or engage in, connive at or support cyber activities that undermine other countries' national security.
——维护和平安全。一个安全稳定繁荣的网络空间，对各国乃至世界都具有重大意义。在现实空间，战火硝烟仍未散去，恐怖主义阴霾难除，违法犯罪时有发生。网络空间，不应成为各国角力的战场，更不能成为违法犯罪的温床。各国应该共同努力，防范和反对利用网络空间进行的恐怖、淫秽、贩毒、洗钱、赌博等犯罪活动。不论是商业窃密，还是对政府网络发起黑客攻击，都应该根据相关法律和国际公约予以坚决打击。维护网络安全不应有双重标准，不能一个国家安全而其他国家不安全，一部分国家安全而另一部分国家不安全，更不能以牺牲别国安全谋求自身所谓绝对安全。	
- Maintenance of peace and security. A secure, stable and prosperous cyberspace is of great significance to all countries and the world. In the real world, there are still lingering wars, shadows of terrorism and occurrences of crimes. Cyberspace should not become a battlefield for countries to wrestle with one another, still less should it become a hotbed for crimes. Countries should work together to prevent and oppose the use of cyberspace for criminal activities such as terrorism, pornography, drug trafficking, money laundering and gambling. All cyber crimes, be they commercial cyber thefts or hacker attacks against government networks, should be firmly combated in accordance with relevant laws and international conventions. No double standards should be allowed in upholding cyber security. We cannot just have the security of one or some countries while leaving the rest insecure, still less should one seek the so-called absolute security of itself at the expense of the security of others.
——促进开放合作。“天下兼相爱则治，交相恶则乱。”完善全球互联网治理体系，维护网络空间秩序，必须坚持同舟共济、互信互利的理念，摈弃零和博弈、赢者通吃的旧观念。各国应该推进互联网领域开放合作，丰富开放内涵，提高开放水平，搭建更多沟通合作平台，创造更多利益契合点、合作增长点、共赢新亮点，推动彼此在网络空间优势互补、共同发展，让更多国家和人民搭乘信息时代的快车、共享互联网发展成果。	
- Promotion of openness and cooperation. As an old Chinese saying goes, "When there is mutual care, the world will be in peace; when there is mutual hatred, the world will be in chaos." To improve the global Internet governance system and maintain the order of cyberspace, we should firmly follow the concept of mutual support, mutual trust and mutual benefit and reject the old mentality of zero-sum game or "winner takes all". All countries should advance opening-up and cooperation in cyberspace and further substantiate and enhance the opening-up efforts. We should also build more platforms for communication and cooperation and create more converging points of interests, growth areas for cooperation and new highlights for win-win outcomes. Efforts should be made to advance complementarity of strengths and common development of all countries in cyberspace so that more countries and people will ride on the fast train of the information age and share the benefits of Internet development.
——构建良好秩序。网络空间同现实社会一样，既要提倡自由，也要保持秩序。自由是秩序的目的，秩序是自由的保障。我们既要尊重网民交流思想、表达意愿的权利，也要依法构建良好网络秩序，这有利于保障广大网民合法权益。网络空间不是“法外之地”。网络空间是虚拟的，但运用网络空间的主体是现实的，大家都应该遵守法律，明确各方权利义务。要坚持依法治网、依法办网、依法上网，让互联网在法治轨道上健康运行。同时，要加强网络伦理、网络文明建设，发挥道德教化引导作用，用人类文明优秀成果滋养网络空间、修复网络生态。	
- Cultivation of good order. Like in the real world, freedom and order are both necessary in cyberspace. Freedom is what order is meant for and order is the guarantee for freedom. We should respect Internet users' rights to exchange their ideas and express their minds, and we should also build a good order in cyberspace in accordance with law as it will help protect the legitimate rights and interests of all Internet users. Cyberspace is not a place beyond the rule of law. Cyberspace is virtual, but players in cyberspace are real. Everyone should abide by the law, with the rights and obligations of parties concerned clearly defined. Cyberspace must be governed, operated and used in accordance with law, so that the Internet can enjoy sound development under the rule of law. In the meantime, greater efforts should be made to strengthen ethical standards and civilized behaviors in cyberspace. We should give full play to the role of moral teachings in guiding the use of the Internet to make sure that the fine accomplishments of human civilizations will nourish the growth of cyberspace and help rehabilitate cyber ecology.
各位嘉宾、各位朋友！	
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
网络空间是人类共同的活动空间，网络空间前途命运应由世界各国共同掌握。各国应该加强沟通、扩大共识、深化合作，共同构建网络空间命运共同体。对此，我愿提出5点主张。
Cyberspace is the common space of activities for mankind. The future of cyberspace should be in the hands of all countries. Countries should step up communication, broaden consensus and deepen cooperation to jointly build a community of shared future in cyberspace. To this end, I wish to put forward five proposals.
第一，加快全球网络基础设施建设，促进互联互通。网络的本质在于互联，信息的价值在于互通。只有加强信息基础设施建设，铺就信息畅通之路，不断缩小不同国家、地区、人群间的信息鸿沟，才能让信息资源充分涌流。中国正在实施“宽带中国”战略，预计到2020年，中国宽带网络将基本覆盖所有行政村，打通网络基础设施“最后一公里”，让更多人用上互联网。中国愿同各方一道，加大资金投入，加强技术支持，共同推动全球网络基础设施建设，让更多发展中国家和人民共享互联网带来的发展机遇。	
First, speed up the building of global Internet infrastructure and promote inter-connectivity. The essence of the Internet is connectivity, and herein lies the value of information. We should strengthen the building of IT infrastructure for information to travel on a smooth road. Only in this way can we narrow the digital divide between different countries, regions and communities and ensure full flow of information resources. China is now implementing the "Broadband China" strategy. It is estimated that by 2020, broadband network in China will basically cover all the villages. The "last kilometer" of Internet infrastructure will be linked up thanks to this strategy and more people will have access to the Internet. China stands ready to work with all parties concerned to come up with more investment and technical support to jointly advance the building of global Internet infrastructure and enable more developing countries and their people to share the development opportunities brought by the Internet.
第二，打造网上文化交流共享平台，促进交流互鉴。文化因交流而多彩，文明因互鉴而丰富。互联网是传播人类优秀文化、弘扬正能量的重要载体。中国愿通过互联网架设国际交流桥梁，推动世界优秀文化交流互鉴，推动各国人民情感交流、心灵沟通。我们愿同各国一道，发挥互联网传播平台优势，让各国人民了解中华优秀文化，让中国人民了解各国优秀文化，共同推动网络文化繁荣发展，丰富人们精神世界，促进人类文明进步。	
Second, build an online platform for cultural exchange and mutual learning. Culture and civilization are enriched through exchange and mutual learning. The Internet is an important carrier to spread mankind's fine cultures and promote positive energy. China is willing to build, through the Internet, a bridge of international cultural interaction for the fine cultures of the world to learn from each other and for people of all countries to share their feelings and enhance mutual understanding. We will work with all other countries to leverage the strength of the Internet as a communication platform, so that people of other countries will come to know more about China's fine culture and the Chinese people will learn more of theirs. Together, we will promote the prosperity and development of cyber culture, which will enrich people's mind and thinking, and advance human civilization and progress.
第三，推动网络经济创新发展，促进共同繁荣。当前，世界经济复苏艰难曲折，中国经济也面临着一定下行压力。解决这些问题，关键在于坚持创新驱动发展，开拓发展新境界。中国正在实施“互联网+”行动计划，推进“数字中国”建设，发展分享经济，支持基于互联网的各类创新，提高发展质量和效益。中国互联网蓬勃发展，为各国企业和创业者提供了广阔市场空间。中国开放的大门永远不会关上，利用外资的政策不会变，对外商投资企业合法权益的保障不会变，为各国企业在华投资兴业提供更好服务的方向不会变。只要遵守中国法律，我们热情欢迎各国企业和创业者在华投资兴业。我们愿意同各国加强合作，通过发展跨境电子商务、建设信息经济示范区等，促进世界范围内投资和贸易发展，推动全球数字经济发展。
Third, promote innovative development of cyber economy for common prosperity. The world economy is on a difficult and tortuous path to recovery. The Chinese economy is also under certain downward pressure. Solutions lie in innovation-driven development, which will open new horizons of development. China is now implementing the "Internet Plus" action plan, advancing the building of "Digital China", developing the sharing economy, and supporting Internet-based innovation in all forms, with a view to improving the quality and efficiency of development. The robust growth of China's Internet has provided a big market for enterprises and business starters of all countries. China's door of opening-up will never close. Our policy towards foreign investment will not change. Our protection of legitimate rights and interests of foreign-invested enterprises will not change. And the direction of providing better services to foreign companies in their investment and business activities in China will not change. As long as they abide by China's laws, we warmly welcome enterprises and business starters from all countries to invest and do business in China. We are ready to step up cooperation with all countries. Through the development of cross-border e-commerce and the building of information economy demonstration zones, we will be able to spur the growth of worldwide investment and trade, and promote global development of digital economy.
第四，保障网络安全，促进有序发展。安全和发展是一体之两翼、驱动之双轮。安全是发展的保障，发展是安全的目的。网络安全是全球性挑战，没有哪个国家能够置身事外、独善其身，维护网络安全是国际社会的共同责任。各国应该携手努力，共同遏制信息技术滥用，反对网络监听和网络攻击，反对网络空间军备竞赛。中国愿同各国一道，加强对话交流，有效管控分歧，推动制定各方普遍接受的网络空间国际规则，制定网络空间国际反恐公约，健全打击网络犯罪司法协助机制，共同维护网络空间和平安全。	
Fourth, maintain cyber security and promote orderly development. Security and development are like the two wings of a bird or the two wheels of a cart. Security ensures development, and development is what security is aimed at. Cyber security is a global challenge. No country can stay aloof or immune from it. Maintaining cyber security is the shared responsibility of the international community. All countries should work together to contain the abuse of information technology, oppose cyber surveillance and cyber attacks and reject arms race in cyberspace. China will work with all other countries to step up dialogue and exchange, and effectively manage differences. We should push for the formulation of international cyberspace rules accepted by all parties as well as an international convention against terrorism in cyberspace, improve the legal assistance mechanism to fight cyber crimes and jointly uphold peace and security in cyberspace.
第五，构建互联网治理体系，促进公平正义。国际网络空间治理，应该坚持多边参与、多方参与，由大家商量着办，发挥政府、国际组织、互联网企业、技术社群、民间机构、公民个人等各个主体作用，不搞单边主义，不搞一方主导或由几方凑在一起说了算。各国应该加强沟通交流，完善网络空间对话协商机制，研究制定全球互联网治理规则，使全球互联网治理体系更加公正合理，更加平衡地反映大多数国家意愿和利益。举办世界互联网大会，就是希望搭建全球互联网共享共治的一个平台，共同推动互联网健康发展。	
Fifth, build an Internet governance system to promote equity and justice. International cyberspace governance should feature a multilateral approach with multi-party participation. It should be based on consultation among all parties, leveraging the role of various players, including governments, international organizations, Internet companies, technology communities, non-government institutions and individual citizens. There should be no unilateralism. Decisions should not be made with one party calling the shots or only a few parties discussing among themselves. All countries should step up communication and exchange, improve dialogue and consultation mechanism on cyberspace, and study and formulate global Internet governance rules, so that the global Internet governance system becomes fairer and more reasonable and reflects in a more balanced way the aspiration and interests of the majority of countries. This World Internet Conference is held precisely for the purpose of building a platform for global Internet to be shared and governed by all and working together for the healthy development of the Internet.
各位嘉宾、各位朋友！	
Distinguished Guests,
Dear Friends,
“凡益之道，与时偕行。”互联网虽然是无形的，但运用互联网的人们都是有形的，互联网是人类的共同家园。让这个家园更美丽、更干净、更安全，是国际社会的共同责任。让我们携起手来，共同推动网络空间互联互通、共享共治，为开创人类发展更加美好的未来助力
"All good principles should adapt to changing times to remain relevant." While the Internet is invisible, Internet users are visible. The Internet is the common home of mankind. Making it better, cleaner and safer is the common responsibility of the international community. Let us work hand in hand to promote an interconnected cyberspace shared and governed by all, and make contribution to a better future for the progress of all mankind.
最后，预祝大会取得圆满成功！	
In conclusion, I wish the conference a complete success.
谢谢大家。	
Thank you.