99. 习近平在津巴布韦媒体发表署名文章《让中津友谊绽放出更加绚丽的芳华》
让中津友谊绽放出更加绚丽的芳华
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Let the Sino-Zimbabwe Flower Bloom
H.E. Xi Jinping Chinese President
应罗伯特·加布里埃尔·穆加贝总统邀请，我将于12月1日至2日对津巴布韦进行国事访问。这是我首次访问津巴布韦，我对此行充满期待。	
At the invitation of President Robert Gabriel Mugabe, I will pay a State visit to Zimbabwe on December 1-2. I am very much looking forward to this first visit to Zimbabwe.
尽管尚未踏上津巴布韦的土地，但我对这个美丽国家和这里的人民并不陌生。这里有悠久的历史、灿烂的文明、秀丽的风景、丰饶的物产，更有勤劳智慧、勇敢坚强的人民。	
Though I have not been to Zimbabwe, I am no stranger to this beautiful country and its people. Zimbabwe boasts a time-honoured history, splendid civilisation, picturesque scenery and rich resources. And more importantly, the Zimbabwean people are hardworking, creative, courageous and strong-willed.
津巴布韦人民一贯珍视国家独立、捍卫民族尊严，致力于非洲大陆的联合自强。正如大津巴布韦遗址中的石雕“津巴布韦鸟”，历经岁月和风雨打磨始终不改本色。逆风，恰恰是激励鸟儿展翅翱翔、越飞越高的动力。	
The Zimbabwean people have all along been committed to upholding national independence and dignity and building a stronger African continent through unity. They have persevered in their endeavour despite the test of time and setbacks, just as the stone-carved Zimbabwe Bird at the ruins of Great Zimbabwe. In fact, it is headwind that makes birds fly even higher.
中国和津巴布韦虽然远隔万里，但联结两国人民的传统友谊深厚而牢固。在津巴布韦民族解放斗争时期，两国人民并肩战斗，结下了难忘的战友情。我听说，许多当年在中国国内和坦桑尼亚纳钦圭阿营地接受中方培训的津巴布韦自由战士，至今仍会哼唱《三大纪律、八项注意》等歌曲，这令我非常感动。	
China and Zimbabwe, in spite of the vast distance between them, have maintained a traditional friendship that is deep and firm. During the national liberation struggle in Zimbabwe, the Chinese people steadfastly stood behind the Zimbabwean people as comrades-in-arms. I was touched to learn that many Zimbabwean freedom fighters who received training from the Chinese side both in China and at Nachingwea camp in Tanzania can still sing songs such as the "Three Rules of Discipline and the Eight Points for Attention".
1980年4月18日津巴布韦独立当天，中津两国就建立了外交关系。35年来，中国人民和津巴布韦人民风雨同舟，友谊历久弥坚，合作硕果累累。去年8月，穆加贝总统成功对中国进行国事访问。中津双方一致同意将两国打造成为平等相待、相互支持、互利共赢、共同发展的好伙伴、好朋友、好兄弟。这一共识对引领中津关系发展具有重要意义。	
It was on the very day that Zimbabwe gained independence, April 18 1980, that our two countries established diplomatic relations. Over the past 35 years, our two peoples have stood with each other in rain or sunshine, and enjoyed strong friendship and fruitful co-operation. In August last year, President Mugabe paid a successful State visit to China. The two sides agreed to be good partners, good friends and good brothers, who treat each other as equals and support each other for win-win co-operation and common development. This agreement has provided a vital guidance for the growth of China-Zimbabwe relations.
目前，中国是津巴布韦第四大贸易伙伴和第一大投资来源国。中方融资并承担的维多利亚瀑布市机场扩建、卡里巴南岸水电站扩建、“移动壹网”电信改造等项目，将为津巴布韦改善基础设施提供重要助力。	
China is now Zimbabwe's fourth largest trading partner and the biggest source of investment. Projects funded and undertaken by China, such as the expansion of the Victoria Falls Airport and Kariba South Hydropower Station and telecoms transformation of TelOne, will give a strong boost to infrastructure development in Zimbabwe.
中津友好也在两国人民心中生根发芽。据我了解，旅居津巴布韦的华侨中间有一个名为“非爱不可”（Love of Africa）的妈妈团体，还有一位连车牌号都被当地孩子熟知的“程爸爸”（Father Cheng）。他们多年如一日给当地孤儿送去关爱和温暖，用实际行动书写着中津友好的“现在时”，也培育着中津友好的“将来时”。	
China-Zimbabwe friendship has also taken root and sprouted in the heart of our two peoples. I know there is a Chinese mothers' group in Zimbabwe called "Love of Africa", and a "Father Cheng" from China who is so close with the local community that even his car plate number is remembered by the kids there. Over the years, they have brought care and warmth to local orphans. Such concrete actions are manifestations of China-Zimbabwe friendship of the current generation and sow the seeds of friendship for future generations.
去年，穆加贝总统访华时代表津巴布韦人民赠送给中国人民1对小狮子，现已正式落户上海野生动物园。它们被命名为“津津”和“菲菲”。在中文中同“津巴布韦”和“非洲”谐音，寓意中津和中非友好。它们已经成为中津友谊的使者，受到中国人民特别是小朋友们的喜爱。	
During his visit to China last year, President Mugabe gave the Chinese people a pair of lion cubs on behalf of the Zimbabwean people. They are now living in the Shanghai Wild Animal Park. They have been named "Jin Jin" and "Fei Fei", which sound the same as the first Chinese characters for Zimbabwe and Africa and symbolise China's friendship with Zimbabwe and Africa. As messengers of China-Zimbabwe friendship, the two cubs are popular with the Chinese people, especially kids.
中津关系不平凡的发展历程表明，中津友谊源于两国真诚友好、重情守义的文化传统，源于两国共同遵循的独立自主、相互尊重等对外关系基本原则，源于两国发展经济、改善民生的共同使命。	
The extraordinary development of China-Zimbabwe relations shows that our friendship is rooted in the cultural tradition of our two countries that values sincerity and friendship, in the basic principles of independence and mutual respect that we both adhere to in conducting foreign relations, and in the common mission of our two countries to grow the economy and improve people's livelihood.
尽管国际形势不断发生深刻复杂变化，但巩固同包括津巴布韦在内的广大非洲国家关系始终是中国外交的基石，永远不会改变。中国将继续秉持真实亲诚的对非政策理念和正确义利观，同津巴布韦以及其他非洲友好国家携手并进，把中非互利共赢、共同发展的道路走得更宽更好。	
Despite the constant profound and complex changes in the international landscape, it remains a cornerstone of China's foreign policy to consolidate China's relations with Zimbabwe and other African nations. This will never change. In conducting China's relations with Africa, we adhere to the principles of sincerity, practical results, affinity and good faith and uphold the values of friendship, justice and shared interests. We will work with Zimbabwe and all other friendly African nations to pave a broader and more solid road of mutual benefit and common development for China and Africa.
当前，中国人民正在为实现“两个一百年”奋斗目标、实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦而努力奋斗。津巴布韦正在积极推进“可持续经济社会转型计划”，致力于实现经济独立和自主可持续发展。我期待通过这次访问，同穆加贝总统和津巴布韦各界朋友深入交流，增进两国友好，探讨各领域合作新机遇，为两国人民带来更多福祉。	
The Chinese people are striving to achieve our "two centenary goals" and realise the Chinese dream of great national renewal, while Zimbabwe is making vigorous efforts to promote the Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation and achieve economic independence and self-reliant sustainable development.I look forward to having in-depth exchanges of views with President Mugabe and friends from all sectors of Zimbabwe during my visit, with the aim of enhancing friendship between our two countries, exploring new opportunities for co-operation in all areas and delivering more benefits to our two peoples.
——我们要继续在涉及彼此核心利益和重大关切问题上相互理解和支持，中方坚定支持津方维护国家主权、安全、发展利益，坚定支持津巴布韦根据自身国情选择发展道路。	
-- We need to continue to understand and support each other on issues involving our core interests and major concerns. China firmly supports Zimbabwe's efforts to safeguard national sovereignty, security and development interests and its choice of the development path that suits its national conditions.
——我们要把两国发展战略紧密对接起来，将经济互补优势转化为更多实实在在的合作成果，加强发展理念交流，推动务实合作提高水平。	
-- We need to synergise our development strategies, translate our economic complementaries into more tangible outcomes of co-operation, carry out more exchanges on guidelines of development and take our practical co-operation to a new level.
——我们要密切人文交流，加强教育、文化、卫生、旅游、青年、智库、媒体等领域合作，巩固两国友好民意和社会基础，让中津友谊代代相传。	
-- We need to strengthen our cultural and people-to-people exchanges, enhance co-operation in such areas as education, culture, health, tourism, youth, think-tanks and media, consolidate the public support and social basis for China-Zimbabwe friendship, and carry this friendship forward to future generations.
——我们要加强国际协作，维护发展中国家正当权益。中方赞赏津巴布韦作为非盟轮值主席国为维护非洲团结和促进非洲发展所作的重要贡献。	
-- We need to enhance our collaboration on the international arena and uphold the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries. China values the important contribution to the solidarity and development of Africa that Zimbabwe has made after assuming the rotating chairmanship of the African Union.
在结束对津巴布韦访问之后，我和穆加贝总统将前往南非出席中非合作论坛约翰内斯堡峰会。这是中非合作论坛成立15年来举行的第二次峰会，也是首次在非洲大陆举行的中非峰会。	
Following my visit to Zimbabwe, President Mugabe and I will attend the Summit of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC) in Johannesburg, South Africa. This will be the second Summit in the 15-year history of FOCAC, and the first China-Africa summit on the African continent.
津巴布韦有句谚语叫做“一根柴火煮不熟萨杂”，中国人也常说“众人拾柴火焰高”。我期待着在中非合作论坛峰会上同非洲国家领导人共聚一堂，共叙友谊，共谋合作，将中非团结提升到新的高度，共创中非友好合作美好未来。	
As one Zimbabwe idiom goes, "Chikuni chimwe hachikodzi sadza", Chinese people also believe that, "When everybody adds firewood, the flames will rise high." I look forward to joining African leaders at the FOCAC Summit and working with them to advance our friendship and co-operation, lift China-Africa solidarity to a new high and build a better future for China-Africa friendship and co-operation.
11月的哈拉雷，火红的凤凰花开满枝头，带给人们以热情、希望、力量。我相信，在中津两国人民悉心培育下，中津友谊之花一定会绽放出更加绚丽的色彩！	
Harare in November is decorated by full-blown red flamboyant blossoms. They give us enthusiasm, hope and strength. I am convinced that with the dedicated cultivation of the Chinese and Zimbabwean peoples, the flower of China-Zimbabwe friendship will bloom with even brighter splendour.