62. 习近平在越南媒体发表署名文章《开创中越友好新局面》
开创中越友好新局面
For a New Vista in China-Vietnam Friendship
中共中央总书记、中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Xi Jinping
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and President of the People's Republic of China
应越共中央总书记阮富仲和国家主席陈大光邀请，我即将对越南社会主义共和国进行国事访问。这是我在2015年年底访问越南后，再次踏上这片美丽的土地，感到十分亲切。
At the invitation of General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) Nguyen Phu Trong and President of Vietnam Tran Dai Quang, I will soon pay a state visit to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Warm feelings well up inside of me as I am about to be back in this beautiful country after my visit at the end of 2015.
中越是山水相连、唇齿相依的邻邦。两国人民毗邻而居，自古便有互通互鉴之情。
China and Vietnam are very close neighbors connected by mountains and rivers. Our peoples have engaged in exchange and mutual learning since ancient times.
近代以来，在争取国家独立和民族解放的斗争中，两国人民并肩战斗、彼此支援，结下了“同志加兄弟”的特殊情谊。胡志明主席在中国开展革命的时间前后长达12年，同毛泽东主席、周恩来总理等中国领导人情同手足。越南著名将领洪水积极投身中国革命，参加红军25000里长征，成为新中国授衔的唯一一位外籍军官，也是世界上少有的“两国将军”。中国人民也为越南民族解放斗争提供无私帮助，毛泽东主席曾表示“7亿中国人民是越南人民的坚强后盾，辽阔的中国领土是越南人民的可靠后方”。中国赴越南军事顾问团首任炮兵顾问窦金波，在接到帮助越南同志的任务后，将刚降生的女儿起名为“越华”。忆峥嵘岁月，两党两国老一辈领导人亲手缔造、两国人民用鲜血凝成的情谊值得我们永远铭记和珍惜。
In the struggle for independence and liberation in modern times, our peoples fought shoulder to shoulder, and forged a special bond of "camaraderie + brotherhood." Chairman Ho Chi Minh spent 12 long years in China for revolutionary activities. He was like a brother for Chairman Mao Zedong, Premier Zhou Enlai and other Chinese leaders. General Nguyen Son devoted himself to the Chinese revolution and traversed the Long March with the Chinese Red Army. He became the only foreign military officer commissioned in New China and a rare "general of two countries." The Chinese people also provided selfless help to Vietnam in its fight for national liberation. Chairman Mao once said that "The seven hundred million Chinese people are the strong supporters of the Vietnamese people, and the vast Chinese territory is the reliable rear area." Dou Jinbo, the first artillery adviser of the Chinese military advisory group to Vietnam, named his newborn daughter "Yue Hua," meaning "Vietnam and China" upon learning of his mission in Vietnam. This friendship forged with blood by the older generation of leaders of our two parties, countries and peoples in those tumultuous years must be remembered and cherished forever.
进入新时期，在推进改革和革新以及社会主义建设事业中，两国人民相互借鉴、携手并进。我们共同探索符合本国国情的社会主义发展道路，创造出各自的发展奇迹，也推动两国关系得到长足发展。两国政治互信日益牢固，高层往来更加频密。我这次访问是两党两国最高领导人时隔两年后再度实现年内互访。两国务实合作深入拓展。中国连续13年保持越南第一大贸易伙伴地位，越南成为东盟国家中中国最大贸易伙伴，2016年双边贸易额近1000亿美元。越来越多的中国企业到越南投资兴业。天虹集团在越南经营十几年，在北宁省兴建的工厂为当地创造了7000多个就业岗位，也是省内纳税大户。以中国民营企业为主的投资商在前江省创建的龙江工业园，已有30多家企业入驻。两国人文交流更加密切。中国是越南第一大外国游客来源地，岘港、芽庄等旅游城市随处可见中国游客。每周往返于两国之间的客运航班有300多趟。中国的《三国演义》《水浒传》等经典名著在越南备受推崇，当代影视作品也深受越南民众喜爱。越南歌手杜氏清花还在中国中央电视台《星光大道》节目中获得月度冠军。更难能可贵的是，两国通过友好协商解决了陆地和北部湾划界问题，妥善处理并管控分歧，为两国共同发展和地区和平稳定创造了有利条件。这些都是对中越全面战略合作伙伴关系精神内核和丰富内涵的最好诠释。
In the new era, our two peoples have worked closely to pursue reform and renewal, and advance the cause of socialism. We have explored socialist development paths suited to our own national conditions, created miracles in our respective development, and achieved marked progress in our bilateral ties. The two countries now enjoy deeper political mutual trust and closer high-level exchange. With my visit this time, the top leaders of our two parties and countries will have had mutual visits within a single year twice in just three years. The two countries have deepened and broadened practical cooperation. China has been Vietnam's biggest trading partner for 13 years in a row, and Vietnam has become China's biggest trading partner among ASEAN countries. Bilateral trade in 2016 reached nearly 100 billion U.S. dollars. More and more Chinese companies are investing in Vietnam. For example, as a Chinese company running in Vietnam for over 10 years, the Texhong Textile Group has created over 7,000 jobs in Bac Ninh through the plant it opened locally and contributed significantly to local tax revenues. The Long Jiang Industrial Park in Tien Giang, established mainly by private Chinese investors, now hosts over 30 companies. The two countries have increased people-to-people exchange. China has been Vietnam's largest source of foreign tourists, for whom Da Nang and Nha Trang are among the most popular destinations. There are over 300 passenger flights between the two countries every week. Both Chinese literature classics such as The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, The Water Margin and contemporary Chinese movies and TV series have a large fan base in Viet Nam. Do Thi Thanh Hoa, a singer from Viet Nam, won the monthly championship at the "Avenue of Stars," a popular singing competition show on the China Central Television. More importantly, our two countries have, through friendly consultations, delimited the boundaries on land and in the Beibu Gulf and properly managed differences, creating favorable conditions for the common development of the two countries and for regional peace and stability. All the above examples best illustrate the underlying significance and rich implications of the comprehensive strategic cooperative partnership between China and Vietnam.
当前，两国都走在改革发展的新征程上，朝着各自的宏伟目标奋勇前进。上个月，中国共产党成功召开第十九次全国代表大会。这次大会制定了中国党和国家未来发展的总体方针和行动纲领。大会绘制了从现在到本世纪中叶中国建设发展的宏伟蓝图。到2020年，将全面建成小康社会；从2020年到2035年，基本实现社会主义现代化；从2035年到本世纪中叶，把中国建设成为富强民主文明和谐美丽的社会主义现代化强国。我们有能力、有信心带领中国人民朝着实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦迈进。越南也正按照越共十二大确定的方针，全面推进革新事业，朝着早日建成民富国强、民主、公平、文明的现代化工业国目标迈进。我们比以往任何时候都需要携手合作，共同追寻强国富民梦。
Today, the two countries have both embarked on a new journey of reform and development, forging ahead toward our respective ambitious goals. The Communist Party of China successfully held its 19th National Congress last month. Overall guidelines and program of action were set out for the future development of the party and the country, drawing a blueprint for China's development between now and the middle of this century. Our plan is to complete the building of a moderately prosperous society in all respects by 2020; basically realize socialist modernization by 2035; and develop China into a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious, and beautiful by the middle of this century. We have the confidence and the ability to lead the Chinese people toward fulfilling the Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation. Vietnam is, in line with the guidelines set at the 12th National Congress of the CPV, advancing all-round renewal for early realization of the goal of a prosperous people and a strong, democratic, equitable and advanced industrialized country toward modernity. We need to work hand in hand more than ever before in our pursuit of dreams of national strength and prosperity.
当前，国际和地区形势风云变幻，中越两党两国面临许多相同或相似的新问题新挑战。中国俗语称，“艰难困苦，玉汝于成”。越南有句俗语，“莫见浪头高，放下手中桨”。作为前途相关、命运与共的好邻居、好朋友、好同志、好伙伴，我们要维护和发展好两国关系，为各自维护稳定、深化改革、改善民生提供助力，共同推进社会主义事业，促进地区和平稳定和开放发展。我愿就此分享几点想法。
As the international and regional situations keep evolving, our two parties and countries face many identical or similar new problems and challenges. China has a saying, "Adversity makes one stronger, just as polishing makes jade finer." A Vietnamese saying says, "Do not put down your oar just because the waves run high." As good neighbors, friends, comrades and partners whose future is closely interconnected, we need to uphold and further grow our relations, support each other in our endeavors for stability, reform and people's livelihood, jointly advance the cause of socialism and promote regional peace, stability, openness and development. Here, I wish to share with you the following thoughts:
——把稳方向，谋求战略互信新高度。我们要保持高层经常接触，及时就两党两国关系及共同关心的问题交换意见，为中越关系掌好舵。积极开展执政兴国经验交流，加强党际交往，共同丰富和发展社会主义建设理论和实践，打造具有战略意义的命运共同体。
-- We need to keep to the right direction and achieve a new height in strategic mutual trust. We need to maintain close high-level engagement and have timely exchange of views on the relations between our two parties and countries and on issues of shared interest to keep the China-Vietnam relations moving in the right direction. We need to actively share experience on state governance and strengthen inter-party interactions, to enrich and develop the theories and practice of socialist development and build a community of shared future with strategic significance.
——深化合作，构建利益融合新格局。我们要继续把两国发展战略紧密对接起来，共同推进“一带一路”和“两廊一圈”建设，推动基础设施建设、经贸、产能、跨境经济合作区、农业等重点领域合作取得实质进展，给两国人民带来更多实惠。
-- We need to deepen cooperation and foster new prospects for our interconnected interests. We need to enhance the complementarity of our development strategies, promote the development of the "Belt and Road" and the "Two Corridors, One Economic Belt," and work for substantive progress in our cooperation in key areas, including infrastructure, trade, industrial capacity, cross-border economic cooperation zones and agriculture, to deliver more benefits to people of our two countries.
——扩大交流，筑就民心相亲新基础。我们要把传统友谊发扬光大，促进人文交流，密切文化、教育、旅游、青年、媒体等合作，讲好中国故事和越南故事，让中越友好扎根人民心间、代代薪火相传。
-- We need to expand exchanges and build a new foundation for people-to-people affinity. We need to carry forward our traditional friendship, promote people-to-people exchange, step up cooperation in culture, education and tourism and between our youth and media organizations, to help our people know each other better and enhance popular support for our friendship to pass on from generation to generation.
——加强协调，打造多边合作新亮点。我们要把握世界大势和时代潮流，加强在联合国、亚太经合组织、中国－东盟、澜沧江－湄公河合作等多边框架内的协调和配合，共同引领开放包容的区域合作，维护地区开放发展势头。
-- We need to strengthen coordination and create new highlights in multilateral cooperation. We need to follow the trend in today's world and of our times, enhance coordination and cooperation within such multilateral frameworks as the United Nations, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), China-ASEAN Cooperation and Lancang-Mekong Cooperation, and jointly champion open and inclusive regional cooperation to uphold the momentum of regional openness and development.
——着眼大局，续写敦亲睦邻新篇章。我们要从各自改革发展稳定和中越友好大局出发，管控矛盾分歧，坚持友好协商，寻求双方均能接受的海上问题基本和长久解决办法。我们要全面有效落实《南海各方行为宣言》，积极推进“南海行为准则”磋商，共同维护南海和平稳定。
-- We need to bear in mind the big picture and write a new chapter of good-neighborliness in our relations. Acting in the larger interest of our own reform, development and stability and China-Vietnam friendship, we need to well manage our differences and disagreements, and stay committed to seeking a fundamental and durable solution to the maritime issues acceptable to both sides through friendly consultation. We need to fully and effectively implement the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea, actively advance the consultation on a Code of Conduct in the South China Sea and jointly uphold peace and stability there.
我这次访问还有一个重要日程，就是出席在岘港举行的亚太经合组织第二十五次领导人非正式会议。中方支持越方办好这次会议，愿同越方和其他成员一道，在“打造全新动力，开创共享未来”的主题下，就深化区域经济一体化、建设亚太自由贸易区、加强地区互联互通、推进经济结构改革创新、促进包容性发展、规划2020年后合作愿景等方面开展务实讨论，取得积极成果，为推动亚太共同发展繁荣作出积极贡献。
Another important agenda of my visit is to attend the 25th APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting in Da Nang. China supports Vietnam in hosting a successful meeting, and will work with Vietnam and other members to engage in practical discussions on deepening regional economic integration, building the Free Trade Area in the Asia-Pacific, strengthening regional connectivity, advancing economic structural reform and innovation, promoting inclusive development and outlining the Post-2020 Vision under the theme of "Creating New Dynamism, Fostering a Shared Future." We look forward to a highly productive meeting that contributes to the common development and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific.
胡志明主席称越南同中国的关系“如手和足，如杵和臼，如根和茎，如兄和弟”。中国有句古话，“兄弟同心，其利断金”。我期待通过这次访问，同越南领导人以及各界朋友深入交流，共挖合作潜力，厚植友好情谊，深化两国特殊友好，携手开创中越关系新局面。
Chairman Ho Chi Minh once compared the Vietnam-China relationship to the one "between hand and foot, between pestle and mortar, between root and stem, and between elder and younger brothers." A Chinese proverb also says, "When brothers are of the same mind, they have the power to cut through metal." I look forward to having in-depth discussions with the Vietnamese leaders and friends from various sectors on this visit to tap the potential for cooperation, build up friendship, deepen our special ties and jointly create a new vista in China-Vietnam relations.
