134. 习近平接受《华尔街日报》书面采访
1. 《华尔街日报》：在您的领导下，中国在推动新的经济和安全安排方面表现得十分活跃，尤其是亚洲基础设施投资银行更是取得明显进展。中国是否正在有意将此前以美国为主的全球治理结构加以调整使其更向中国倾斜？
Under your leadership, China has been active in promoting new economic and security arrangements. The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, in particular, has been a notable achievement. Is China trying to rearrange the architecture of global governance, away from the U.S. and toward China?
习近平：全球治理体系是由全球共建共享的，不可能由哪一个国家独自掌握。中国没有这种想法，也不会这样做。中国是现行国际体系的参与者、建设者、贡献者，一直维护以联合国为核心、以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为基础的国际秩序和国际体系。
XI: The global governance system is built and shared by the world, not monopolized by a single country. China certainly has no intention to do so. China is involved in building the current international system, and has always done its part to uphold the international order and system with the U.N. as its core and the purposes and principles of the U.N. charter as its foundation.
世界上很多有识之士都认为，随着世界不断发展变化，随着人类面临的重大跨国性和全球性挑战日益增多，有必要对全球治理体制机制进行相应的调整改革。这种改革并不是推倒重来，也不是另起炉灶，而是创新完善。“穷则变，变则通。”无论是一个国家，还是世界，都需要与时俱进，这样才能保持活力。推动全球治理体系朝着更加公正合理有效的方向发展，符合世界各国的普遍需求。中美在全球治理领域有着广泛共同利益，应该共同推动完善全球治理体系。这不仅有利于双方发挥各自优势、加强合作，也有利于双方合作推动解决人类面临的重大挑战。
Many visionary people hold that as the global landscape evolves and major transnational and global challenges facing mankind increase, it is necessary to adjust and reform the global governance system and mechanism. Such reform is not about dismantling the existing system and creating a new one to replace it. Rather, it aims to improve the global governance system in an innovative way. We in China have a saying, “When all means are exhausted, changes are necessary; once changes are made, things will improve.” Whether for a country or the entire world, adaptation to keep pace with the times is necessary in order to maintain its vigor. To build a more equitable, just and effective architecture of global governance meets the common aspiration of all countries. China and the U.S. share broad interests in this respect and should work together to improve the global governance system. This will not only leverage our respective strengths to enhance cooperation, but also enable our two countries to jointly respond to major challenges facing mankind.
中国几十年的发展很大程度上得益于国际合作。因此，我们应该为国际发展事业作出贡献，很多发展中国家朋友对中国提出了这方面的强烈愿望。建立亚投行，主要是为满足亚洲地区基础设施建设的需求以及亚洲各国在深化合作方面的愿望。据世行、亚开行测算，2010年到2020年，亚洲地区每年基础设施建设资金缺口达8000亿美元。亚投行可以为这种需求多提供一种资金投入选择，因而受到亚洲国家和国际社会欢迎。面对这么大的需求，亚投行只是一个渠道，不可能包打天下。亚投行是一个开放和包容的多边开发机构，将同现有多边开发银行相互补充。除了域内国家，德国、法国、英国等国家也都加入了亚投行。中方欢迎美国参与亚投行，从一开始我们就是这个态度。
China owes much of its progress in development over the past decades to international cooperation; we thus feel duty-bound to make greater contribution to international development endeavors. Many other developing countries have also expressed similar strong wishes to China. The Asian Infrastructure Development Bank (AIIB) is established mainly as a response to the need of Asian countries for infrastructure development and their aspirations for further cooperation. According to the projection of the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, from 2010 to 2020, the annual shortfall in funding for Asian infrastructural development is around US$800 billion. The AIIB serves as a new option to meet this shortfall, and it is therefore welcomed by both Asian countries and the wider international community. But as the funding shortage is huge, it is clear that the AIIB alone cannot possibly meet such demand. As an open and inclusive multilateral development agency, the AIIB will complement other multilateral development banks. In addition to Asian countries, countries outside Asia such as Germany, France and the U.K. have also joined the AIIB. China welcomes the U.S. to join the AIIB. This has been our position from the very outset.
我不认为世界上哪个国家可以使全球治理结构向自己倾斜，也不认为这样做是符合时代潮流的。全球治理结构如何完善，应该由各国共同来决定。联合国马上就要举行成立70周年系列峰会。中国愿同广大成员国一道，推动建设以合作共赢为核心的新型国际关系，完善全球治理结构，共同构建人类命运共同体。
I don't believe any country is capable of rearranging the architecture of global governance toward itself. Obviously, such practice goes against the trend of the times. The improvement of global governance architecture should be decided by all countries. As the U.N. summit commemorating the 70th anniversary draws nearer, China stands ready to work with all the other U.N. member states to build a new type of international relationship featuring win-win cooperation, improve the architecture of global governance, and build a community of shared future for mankind.
《华尔街日报》：中国在处理地区和国际事务方面越来越自信，从中东到非洲到朝鲜半岛都是如此。中美在哪些领域利益一致，在哪些领域又存在分歧？中方如何看待最近达成的伊朗核协议？您是否担心朝鲜的核野心？
2. China is playing an increasingly assertive role in regions around the world, from the Middle East to Africa and the Korean peninsula. Where do China's interests align or differ from the U.S.? What's China's view of the recent nuclear deal on Iran? How worried are you about North Korea's nuclear ambitions?
习近平：中国奉行独立自主的和平外交政策，愿意为维护世界和平、促进共同发展作出努力。当今世界，中国不可能独善其身，只有世界好，中国才能好。在推动世界经济复苏、政治解决国际和地区热点、应对各种全球性问题和挑战等方面，中国都没有缺席。这是国际社会的希望，也是中国的责任。
XI:China pursues an independent foreign policy of peace and is committed to world peace and common development. In today's world, it is impossible for China to develop on its own; only when the world thrives can China prosper. China has never been absent in efforts to promote world economic recovery, seek political settlement of international and regional hotspots and respond to various global problems and challenges. This is what the international community expects of China, and to do so is China's responsibility.
中美两国都是联合国安理会常任理事国，肩负着维护世界和地区和平与安全的重要责任，存在广泛共同利益。中方愿同美方携手应对重大全球和地区性问题，己经做了很多事，还将继续做下去。中美在应对朝核、伊朗核、巴以和谈、南苏丹、气候变化、重大传染性疾病等一系列国际和地区问题及全球性挑战方面开展了密切协调和合作。当然，中美在处理一些问题时思路和方法并不完全一致，有不同才能相互补益，找到问题的最佳解决方案。
Both being permanent members of the U.N. Security Council, China and the U.S. shoulder important responsibility of upholding regional and world peace and security, and our interests converge in a broad range of areas. China wishes to join hands with the U.S. to tackle major regional and global issues. As a matter of fact, we have done a great deal together in this area and will continue to do so. For example, China and the U.S. have been engaged in close coordination and cooperation in addressing various regional and international issues as well as global challenges, ranging from the Korean nuclear issue and the Iranian nuclear issue to Palestine-Israel peace talks, South Sudan, climate change and major epidemic diseases. Admittedly, there are differences in our respective thinking on and approach to some issues. However, differences are the reason why we should complement each other and find best solutions to issues.
在处理国际和地区事务时，中国坚持平等、公平、正义，倡导以和为贵，主张通过和平谈判政治解决有关问题。处理国际和地区事务，应该根据事情本身的是非曲直决定立场和政策，说公道话，办公道事。我们不赞成强行干涉别国内政，认为很多事情应该商量着办。不管遇到多么大的困难、多么复杂的情况，国际社会都应该坚定信心，持之以恒坚持和平努力。
In addressing regional and international issues, China adheres to the principles of equality, fairness and justice and calls for seeking political settlement of relevant issues through peaceful negotiation. In addressing these issues, China bases its position and policy on the merit of each particular case and endeavors to uphold justice. China opposes arbitrary interference in other countries' internal affairs and stands for resolving issues through consultation. No matter how difficult and complex the challenges are, the international community should meet them with confidence and strive to resolve them through peaceful means.
伊朗核问题政治解决取得重大成果，中美为此进行了共同努力。这说明我们的主张和方法是有效的。中方将同各方一道，推动全面协议得到有效落实。
The political settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue represents a major achievement of the international community, and China and the U.S. worked hard to make this possible. It shows that our approaches have worked well. Going forward, China will work with all parties involved to ensure the deal is fully implemented.
中方坚持朝鲜半岛无核化的立场是坚定的、明确的，同时我们认为应该通过和平手段实现半岛无核化、维护半岛和平稳定。当前，半岛局势复杂敏感。中方愿同美方及相关各方继续就妥善处理半岛事务、实现东北亚地区长治久安等问题保持密切沟通和协调。
China's position for denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula is firm and clear-cut. At the same time, we believe that the denuclearization, peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula should be achieved through peaceful means. The current situation of the Korean Peninsula is intricate and sensitive. China will maintain close communication and coordination with the U.S. and relevant parties to properly address issues relating to the Korean Peninsula and ensure long-term stability of Northeast Asia.
《华尔街日报》：中国梦是您就职后最早提出的概念之一，这个提法现在在中国很流行，同时也让人想起我们在美国常会提到的美国梦。您曾经说过，中国梦是强国梦也是强军梦。您觉得中国梦和美国梦有哪些相似的地方？又有哪些不同的地方？
3. One of the first slogans you raised upon taking office was the “China Dream.” It proved popular at home and has the ring of the “American dream.” In speeches you've given, you've said the “China Dream” is about building a strong nation and strong military. What do you see as the similarities and differences between the “China Dream” and the “American dream”?
习近平：中国梦最根本的是实现中国人民的美好生活。关于这个问题，需要从历史和现实两个向度来认识。1840年鸦片战争之后，中华民族经历了长达一个世纪的社会动荡、外族侵略、战争磨难，但中国人民始终自强不息、顽强斗争，从未放弃对美好梦想的向往和追求。看待当今中国，一定要深刻认识中国近代以后所遭受的民族苦难，一定要深刻认识这种长期的民族苦难给中国人民精神世界带来的深刻影响。所以我们说，实现中华民族伟大复兴的中国梦是近代以来中华民族最伟大的梦想。中国梦是中华民族的梦，也是每个中国人的梦。中国梦不是镜中花、水中月，不是空洞的口号，其最深沉的根基在中国人民心中。
XI: The Chinese dream is fundamentally about making life better for the Chinese people, and I think one should approach this concept from two angles: history and reality. Starting from the Opium War in 1840, the Chinese nation went through a century of social turbulence, foreign aggression and the sufferings of war. Yet throughout all this trying time, our people stood on their feet and struggled tenaciously for a better future. They never gave up the longing for their cherished dream. To understand today's China, one needs to fully appreciate the Chinese nation's deep suffering since modern times and the profound impact of such suffering on the Chinese minds. That is why we regard the Chinese dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation as its greatest dream since modern times. The Chinese dream is as much the dream of every Chinese as it is the dream of the whole nation. It is not an illusion, nor is it an empty slogan. The Chinese dream is deeply rooted in the hearts of the Chinese people.
每个国家、每个民族都有自己的梦想。有梦想才有希望。上次访美时，我在艾奥瓦州马斯卡廷的老朋友们也向我提起他们的梦想。我深深感到，各国人民包括美国人民都对未来有着共同梦想：世界和平，社会安宁，生活富足。当然，由于历史文化、发展阶段的不同，中国梦、美国梦以及其他国家人民的梦想内涵不尽相同，实现的具体途径和方式也可能不完全一样。条条大路通罗马。各国人民对梦想的追求，不论有什么异同，都是激励他们顽强奋斗的强大动力，也为中美合作和各国合作提供了重要机遇。
Every country and every nation has its own dream, and dream brings hope. During my last visit to the United States, my old friends in Muscatine, Iowa, talked to me about their dream. I have the impression that the Americans and people in all other countries share the same dream about the future: world peace, social security and stability, and a decent life. Naturally, owing to differences in history, culture and stage of development, China, the United States and other countries may not have the exact same dream, and they pursue their dreams in different ways. But all roads lead to Rome. The dreams of various peoples, however different in meaning, are sources of inspiration for them, and all these dreams create important opportunities for China and the United States, as well as other countries to engage in cooperation.
《华尔街日报》：中美两国间的关系近年来受到诸多问题的困扰，如南海岛礁建设、网络间谍、美国跨国公司认为在华业务受到不平等待遇等问题。在美国国内一些人甚至提出要对中国采取新的遏制政策。您如何回应这些涉及中国的批评意见？您认为维系中美关系的重要因素是什么？如何能使得两国之间的纽带更加紧密？
4. Relations between the two countries are strained by many issues - from China's island-building in the South China Sea to allegations of cyber-spying and complaints by American businesses of unfair regulations. Some in the U.S. are even calling for a new containment policy against China. How do you answer these critics? What's the glue that holds U.S.-China relations together and how can it be made stronger?
习近平：看待中美关系，要看大局，不能只盯着两国之间的分歧，正所谓“得其大者可以兼其小”。中美两国经济总量占世界三分之一、人口占世界四分之一、贸易总量占世界五分之一。这两个“大块头”不合作，世界会怎样？历史和现实都表明，中美两国合则两利、斗则俱伤。2013 年夏天，我同奥巴马总统在加利福尼亚州安纳伯格庄园举行会晤，作出共同构建中美新型大国关系的战略抉择，其核心内容就是不冲突、不对抗、相互尊重、合作共赢。两年多来，围绕这一共识，两国各领域交流合作日益深化，水平不断提升，双方就几乎所有重大国际和地区问题及全球性挑战保持着密切有效的沟通和协调。事实证明，中美两国利益己日趋紧密地联系在一起，两国关系发展不仅造福两国人民，也有力促进了亚太地区和世界和平、稳定、发展。
XI:In approaching China-U.S. relations, one should see the larger picture and not just focus on differences, just as a Chinese saying tells us, “When important things are addressed first, secondary issues will not be difficult to settle.” Together, China and the United States account for one-third of the world economy, one-fourth of the global population, and one-fifth of global trade. If two big countries like ours do not cooperate with each other, just imagine what will happen to the world. Both history and reality show that China and the United States stand to gain from cooperation and lose from confrontation. When President Obama and I met at the Annenberg Estate, California, in the summer of 2013, we made the strategic decision of jointly building a new model of major-country relationship between China and the United States featuring nonconflict or confrontation, mutual respect and win-win cooperation. In the past two years and more since then, guided by this agreement, our exchanges and cooperation across the board have kept deepening and been upgraded. We maintain close and effective dialogue and cooperation on almost all major international and regional issues and global challenges. Facts have shown that the interests of China and the U.S. have grown increasingly intertwined. The growth of the China-U.S. relationship has not only benefited our two peoples, it has also enhanced peace, stability and development in the Asia-Pacific and beyond.
当然，一个家庭还会有这样那样的矛盾，中美两国难免会存在一些分歧。双方要相互理解、相互尊重、聚同化异，尊重和照顾彼此核心利益和重大关切。对可以解决的问题，双方要相向而行，共同努力加以解决。对一时解决不了的问题，要以建设性方式善加管控，防止激化或升级，防止对两国总体关系和符合两国人民利益的合作大局造成干扰。
Naturally, we have some differences, even family members don't always see eye to eye with each other. Our two countries should understand and respect each other, expand common ground and properly handle differences, and respect and accommodate each other's core interests and major concerns. On issues that can be resolved, the two sides should make joint efforts to seek a solution; as to those issues that cannot be resolved for the time being, we should manage them in a constructive way, make sure that they are not exacerbated or escalated, and prevent them from derailing the overall relationship of the two countries and cooperation that has served our two peoples so well.
南沙群岛自古以来就是中国的领土，我们对此有着充足的历史和法理依据。中国对南沙部分驻守岛礁进行了相关建设和设施维护，不影响也不针对任何国家，不应过度解读。中方岛礁建设主要是为了改善岛上人员工作生活条件，并提供相应国际公共产品服务，也有助于进一步维护南海航行自由和安全。
The Nansha Islands have been China's territory since ancient times. This is fully backed by historical and legal evidence. China's development and maintenance of facilities on some of our garrisoned islands and reefs in the Nansha Islands does not impact on or target any other country, and it should not be overinterpreted. These facilities have been built to improve the working and living conditions of the Chinese personnel on the maritime features, provide international public goods and services, and better uphold navigation freedom and safety in the South China Sea.
中国是网络安全的坚定维护者。中国是黑客攻击的受害国。中国政府不会以任何形式参与、鼓励或支持企业从事窃取商业秘密行为。不论是网络商业窃密，还是对政府网络发起黑客攻击，都是违法犯罪行为，都应该根据法律和相关国际公约予以打击。中美双方在网络安全上有共同关切，我们愿同美方加强合作。
China takes cybersecurity very seriously. China is also a victim of hacking. The Chinese government does not engage in theft of commercial secrets in any form, nor does it encourage or support Chinese companies to engage in such practices in any way. Cybertheft of commercial secrets and hacking attacks against government networks are both illegal; such acts are criminal offenses and should be punished according to law and relevant international conventions. China and the United States share common concerns on cybersecurity. We are ready to strengthen cooperation with the U.S. side on this issue.
我将同奥巴马总统就双边关系和国际形势深入交换意见，并广泛接触美国各界人士，共商进一步发展中美关系大计，希望这次访问能向国际社会发出中美加强合作、共同应对全球性挑战的积极信息。
I will have in-depth exchanges of views with President Obama on bilateral relations and the international developments and engage the American public in order to jointly chart the course for growing China-U.S. relations. I am sure that this visit will send a positive message to the international community that China and the United States will strengthen cooperation and jointly meet global challenges.
《华尔街日报》：中国在亚洲地区军事实力和军事行动的扩张引起了美国政府关注以及部分亚洲国家担忧。您能否给我们解释一下中国的意图？美国及其盟友在亚洲的军事构架是否让中国缺乏安全感？美国政府是否应该做些事情以照顾中国的安全利益？
5. The expansion of China's military power and military operations has caused concern in Washington and unsettled some governments in the region. Please explain China's intentions. Does the U.S. alliance structure in Asia make Beijing feel less secure? Should Washington do more to accommodate Chinese security interests?
习近平：中国历来奉行防御性国防政策和积极防御的军事战略。中国加强国防和军队建设，并不是为了穷兵黯武，我们没有这个想法。在国土之外，中国在亚洲没有任何军事基地，没有任何驻军。中国是一个大国，领土、领海、领空广阔，具有漫长的边界线，需要对国防建设保持一定投入，也需要保持适度规模的军队。为表明中国坚持和平发展的决心，我不久前宣布中国将裁军30万。中国早就承诺永远不搞扩张、永远不称霸。历史已经证明并将继续证明这一点。
XI:China has always pursued a defense policy that is defensive in nature and a military strategy featuring active defense. In strengthening our defense and military building, we are not going after some kind of military adventure. It never crosses our mind. China has no military base in Asia and stations no troops outside its borders. China is a big country that has vast territorial land, sea and airspace and very long borders. We need to maintain proper investment in our defense and keep the troop size at an appropriate level. To demonstrate China's determination to uphold peace and development, I announced not long ago a troop cut by 300,000. China has long pledged never to practice expansionism and seek hegemony. History has and will continue to prove this.
中国是联合国安理会五常中派出维和人员最多的国家，中国军队在亚丁湾护航、打击海盗、参与叙利亚化学武器外运等方面发挥了重要作用。中国军队在周边最多的行动，就是应邀帮助一些国家应对自然灾害。中国军队将在力所能及范围内向国际社会提供更多公共安全产品。
China has contributed more U.N. peacekeepers than any other permanent member of the Security Council. The Chinese military has played important roles in antipiracy escort operation in the Gulf of Aden and in the shipping of chemical weapons out of Syria for destruction. In our neighborhood, China's military has helped many countries to deal with natural disasters. It will do still more within its capacity to provide public security goods to the international community.
中美都是亚太重要国家，亚太是中美利益交织最密集、互动最频繁的地区。中美两国都希望亚太地区保持和平稳定，这符合两国和地区国家共同利益。亚太应该成为中美加强协调和配合的合作社，而不应该成为中美互相角力的角斗场。我们的态度是，凡是有利于地区和平稳定的事，我们都欢迎：凡是可能导致地区冲突和动荡的事，我们都反对。
Both China and the United States are major Asia-Pacific countries, whose interests intersect more closely and interact more frequently than in any other region of the world. Both sides desire to see peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific, as it serves their common interests as well as those of the countries in the region. The Asia-Pacific should be a cooperative ground for enhanced China-U.S. coordination and collaboration rather than their Coliseum for supremacy. Our attitude is this: we welcome whatever that contributes to regional peace and stability, and oppose whatever that may lead to conflict and turmoil in the region.
中美双方应该在亚太地区积极践行互相尊重、合作共赢的理念。中国军队2014年首次参加“环太平洋军演”，中美两军正在推进“两个互信机制”建设，期待中美在亚太地区寻找更多契合点，不断增进战略互信，同地区国家一道，维护地区和平、稳定、繁荣。
In the Asia-Pacific, both China and the United States should vigorously implement the principles of mutual respect and win-win cooperation. China participated in RIMPAC for the first time in 2014. The two militaries are stepping up the two Confidence-Building Mechanisms. We hope to identify still more converging ground in the region for the two countries, continuously build up strategic trust and work with other countries in making the region more peaceful, stable and prosperous.
《华尔街日报》：今年夏天对于中国来说是个“多事之夏”：股市直线下跌，人民币贬值，实体经济发展也在放缓。全球很多投资者都在担心中国经济要比官方数字所显示的更为疲软，他们也想知道中国政府是否能够有效控制局面。您如何解读目前的中国经济状况？目前中国政府正在采取哪些措施以提升国内外投资者的信心？
6. China has had a tumultuous summer, with plummeting stock markets, a devaluation of the renminbi and signs of economic weakness. Many investors around the world wonder if the Chinese economy is weaker than the official figures show and if the government is sufficiently in control. What's your assessment of the economy and what is being done to shore up confidence among Chinese and global investors?
习近平：中国经济增速仍然居世界前列。今年上半年，中国经济增长7%，在世界总体经济形势复杂多变的环境下，这是来之不易的。根据我们设定的发展目标，即到2020年实现国内生产总值和城乡居民人均收入比2010年翻一番，保持7%左右的增长速度就可以做到。
XI: China's economic growth is still one of the fastest in the world. In the first half of the year, the Chinese economy grew by 7%, which is hard-won considering the intricacy and changeable nature of the overall global economy. A growth rate of around 7% would be sufficient to reach our goal of doubling the 2010 GOP and per capita income by 2020.
中国经济运行仍然保持在合理区间。中国需要的是提高经济发展质量和效益，解决经济发展中存在的不平衡、不协调、不可持续问题，以利于走得更稳更远。我们正在加快转变经济发展方式、调整经济结构，更加注重创新驱动，更加倚重消费拉动。我们希望通过解决这些问题，使中国经济凤凰涅槃、浴火重生，保持强劲发展动力。
The Chinese economy is still operating within the proper range. What China needs is a higher quality and efficiency of economic development by successfully addressing the problem of unbalanced, uncoordinated and unsustainable development, so that our economy will be put on a more solid basis and go forward more steadily. We are stepping up efforts to shift our growth model, make structural adjustment and place greater emphasis on developing an innovation and consumption-driven economy. It is our hope that by solving these problems, China's economy will transform itself and retain its robust dynamism for development.
在当前世界经济大环境下，各国经济都面临着困难，中国经济也面临着一定下行压力，但这是前进中的问题。我想特别强调，无论发生什么情况，中国都将坚定不移全面深化改革，不断扩大开放。我们将统筹稳增长、促改革、调结构、惠民生、防风险，加强和创新宏观调控，促进经济平稳较快发展。中国新型工业化、信息化、 城镇化、农业现代化持续推进，居民储蓄率高，消费潜力巨大，人民工作勤奋，中等收入者比重在提高，服务业发展势头强劲，市场空间和潜力都很大，今后一个时期保持经济中高速增长有基础也有条件。
Against the overall global economic backdrop, many countries have encountered difficulties. The Chinese economy is also under a downward pressure. But it is a problem in the course of progress. What I want to emphasize, in particular, is that whatever happens, China will stay strongly committed to deepening its reform on all fronts while opening still wider to the outside world. We will work in a coordinated fashion to ensure growth, promote reform, make structural adjustment, improve people's well-being and forestall risks, enhancing and innovating macro-regulation and ensuring steady and fairly rapid economic development. With China steadily promoting a new type of industrialization, IT application, urbanization and agricultural modernization, its household savings rate being so high and consumer spending enjoying a huge potential plus its diligent workforce, its rising middle-income population, its robust service sector and its vast and potential-rich market, China has the capacity and is in the position to maintain a medium-high growth in the years to come.
风物长宜放眼量。分析中国经济，要看这艘大船方向是否正确，动力是否强劲，潜力是否充沛。在大海上航行，再大的船也会有一时的颠簸。只要投资者全面了解中国改革开放以来的经济发展历程、近期中国为促进经济持续稳定增长制定的战略以及中国经济各项数据和趋势，就会作出正确判断。上海美国商会今年发表的报告显示，约95%的受访企业计划加大或维持在华投资。这是300多位美国企业家的选择。我相信，聪明的投资者都会作出同样选择。
To understand China's economy, one needs to take a longer view. If you liken it to a large ship on the sea, the question you ask is whether it is sailing in the right direction, does it have sufficient engine power and energy to stay long. Any ship, however large, may occasionally get unstable sailing on the high sea. Investors will come to a right judgment if they have a full understanding of China's progress in economic development since the start of reform and opening-up, of China's strategies formulated recently to ensure sustained and steady growth, and of the relevant data and trends in China's economic performance. The report released by the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai showed that 95% of the surveyed businesses have planned to increase or maintain their investment in China. That is a decision made by over 300 American entrepreneurs, a decision I believe all smart investors will make.
《华尔街日报》：您任职伊始，就提出了一个雄心勃勃的改革方案，承诺要让市场发挥“决定性”作用。而今夏因股市波动采取的救市措施看起来似乎跟贵国的改革承诺背道而驰。您觉得政府干预救市的必要性有哪些？在未来的几个月乃至更长一段时间中，中国在经济改革方面还有哪些我们值得期待的举措？《人民日报》等一些官方权威媒体都有报道称目前的改革遇到了一些阻力。您觉得阻力来自哪些方面？
7. Early on your leadership laid out an ambitious program for reform, promising to let markets play a “decisive” role. The stock market rescue this summer, however, has raised questions about your leadership's commitment to economic reform. Why did you think it necessary to intervene in the stock markets? What significant economic reforms lay ahead over the coming months and year? People's Daily and other state media have reported on resistance to reform; where does the opposition come from?
习近平：当前，中国经济体制改革的重要方向就是使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用和更好发挥政府作用。简言之，就是“看不见的手”和“看得见的手”都要用好。
XI:An important goal for China's current economic reform is to enable the market to play the decisive role in resource allocation and make the government better play its role. That means we need to make good use of both the invisible hand and the visible hand.
股市涨跌有其自身的运行规律，一般情况下政府不干预。政府的职责是维护公开、公平、公正的市场秩序，保护投资者特别是中小投资者的合法权益，促进股市长期稳定发展，防止发生大面积恐慌。前段时间，中国股市出现了异常波动，这主要是由于前期上涨过高过快以及国际市场大幅波动等因素引起的。为避免发生系统性风险，中国政府采取了一些措施，遏制了股市的恐慌情绪，避免了一次系统性风险。境外成熟市场也采取过类似做法。在综合采取多种稳定措施后，市场已经进入自我修复和自我调节阶段。发展资本市场是中国的改革方向，不会因为这次股市波动而改变。
The ups and downs of stock markets are caused by the very nature of such markets, and the government normally does not intervene. The role of the government is to maintain an open, fair and impartial market order, protect the lawful rights and interests of investors, especially small- and medium-scale investors, promote the stable growth of the stock market in the long run, and defuse massive panic. The recent unusual fluctuations in the Chinese stock market were mainly the result of previous rapid surges and big fluctuations in the international market. The Chinese government has taken some measures to defuse systemic risks. Such steps have proved successful. As a matter of fact, similar steps have also been taken in some mature foreign markets. Thanks to a mix of stabilizing steps taken, the market has entered a stage of self-correction and adjustment. To develop the capital market is a key goal of China's reform, which will not change just because of current market fluctuations.
2014年，我们蹄疾步稳推进各项改革，80个重点改革任务基本完成，此外有关部门还完成了108个改革任务，各方面共出台370条改革成果。今年以来，我们已经推出了70多个重点改革方案。9月15日，我们讨论通过了实行市场准入负面清单制度、支持沿边重点地区开发开放若干政策措施、加快完善价格机制、鼓励和规范国有企业投资项目引入非国有资本等改革方案。我们今年确定了100多项重点改革，还要继续出台一批重大经济改革举措，把有利于稳增长、调结构、惠民生、防风险的改革举措往前排，将在财税、金融、开放、司法、民生等领域集中推出一些力度大、措施实的改革方案。
In 2014, we advanced reform in various areas in a fast yet steady manner, and 80 major reform tasks were basically completed. On top of that, the relevant government departments completed 108 reform tasks, with 370 reform outcomes delivered in various sectors. Since the beginning of this year, we have introduced over 70 major reform plans. On Sept. 15, we discussed and adopted a number of reform plans, including the implementation of a system of negative list on market access, policies to support the development and opening-up of key border regions, a decision to accelerate the improvement of the pricing mechanism, and a plan to encourage the injection of non-state capital in investment projects launched by state-owned enterprises in accordance with due procedures. This year, we have decided to launch over 100 key reform steps, and more major economic reform steps will be introduced. Those items of reform that facilitate growth, structural adjustment, people's well-being and risk prevention will be prioritized. And substantive reform plans will be vigorously implemented in such areas as fiscal policy and taxation, finance, opening-up, the judiciary and people's well-being.
中国这一轮改革是全面改革，力度之大前所未有，经过努力，一些多年来难啃的硬骨头啃下来了。改革必然会触及一些人的既得利益，改变一些人的工作和生活状态，当然会有难度，不然就不叫改革了。所以，我说过，改革要敢于啃硬骨头、敢于涉险滩，改革关头勇者胜。同时，改革要扎扎实实干，想入非非不行，哗众取宠不行，蜻蜓点水也不行。开弓没有回头箭，我们将继续坚定不移实现改革目标，风雨无阻，勇往直前。
This round of reform in China is comprehensive in nature and it is being pursued with unprecedented intensity. We have made enormous efforts and managed to overcome some long-standing obstacles. These reform steps have upset the vested interests of some people, and caused changes to the career and life of some people. It is only natural that there will be difficulties. Otherwise it will not be a reform. That is why I said that we must be bold enough to crack hard nuts and ford dangerous rapids during reform and that only the daring will prevail at key stages of reform. At the same time, reform calls for down-to-earth efforts. To set unrealistic expectations, play to public opinion by talking big or just scratch the surface will not work. Like an arrow shot that cannot be brought back, we will forge ahead against all odds to meet our goals of reform.
《华尔街日报》：中国政府正在就人民币纳入国际货币基金组织储备货币篮子同国际货币基金组织进行讨论。今年8月人民币汇率的贬值也被看作是迈向更为灵活汇率形成机制的重要举措，但此举同时也吓坏了全球市场。中国是否会完全放开资本账户，使人民币成为能够自由兑换的货币？您是否担心中国外汇储备的下降以及资本外逃？
8. Your government is engaged with the International Monetary Fund to have the RMB included in the official basket of reserve currencies. The devaluation in August was seen as a step toward a more flexible exchange rate, but also spooked global markets. Will China fully open its capital account to make the yuan a free convertible currency? How concerned are you about declines in China's foreign currency reserves and capital flight?
习近平：中国一直在完善人民币汇率市场化形成机制。这次完善人民币汇率中间价报价就是其中一步，加大了市场决定汇率的力度。当前，国际经济金融形势复杂，做市商对人民币汇率走势预期明显分化，使得人民币汇率中间价和市场汇率出现了较长时间的偏离。完善中间价报价使中间价形成更加参考外汇市场供求关系，从机制上防止中间价和市场汇率持续大幅偏离。8月11日中间价报价完善以来，偏差矫正己初见成效。从国际国内经济金融形势看，人民币汇率不存在持续贬值的基础。人民币汇率形成机制改革会继续朝更加市场化的方向迈进。
XI:China has been working to improve market-based RMB exchange rate regime. Recent measures to improve the quotation of the RMB central parity is a case in point, as it gives greater say to the market in deciding the exchange rate. Given the complexities in the current international economic scene and financial market and the apparent divergence in market makers' expectations of the future trend of the RMB exchange rate, there had been a long-standing gap between the central parity and market exchange rate of the RMB. With improvements to the quotation of the RMB central parity, the RMB central parity will better respond to supply and demand in the foreign exchange markets, and systemically avert the sustained large gap between the RMB central parity and market exchange rate. Since the quotation of RMB central parity was improved on Aug. 11, initial progress has been made in correcting the deviation. Given the current economic and financial conditions at home and abroad, there is no basis for sustained depreciation of the RMB. Reform of the RMB exchange rate formation regime will continue in the direction of market operation.
中国早在上世纪90年代初期就提出了实现资本项目可兑换的目标。20多年来，中国一直在朝着资本项目可兑换方向努力。目前，人民币资本项目完全不开放的交易已经不多，中国正在稳步有序向前推进人民币资本项目可兑换相关工作。
China put forward the goal of convertibility of the RMB under the capital account back in the early 1990s. Over the past 20 years and more, China has been working toward this goal. Currently, there are only very few transactions that are still banned under the RMB capital account. China is advancing the convertibility of the RMB under the capital account in a steady and orderly manner.
近期，中国外汇储备余额下降，主要反映了境内银行、企业、个人等本外币资产负债结构的优化调整。主要有三个原因：一是部分外汇资产由央行转向境内银行、企业等机构及个人持有，如今年前8个月境内银行各项外汇存款余额增加569亿美元，其中8月份增加270亿美元。二是境内企业“走出去”对外投资增长较快。三是境内企业等市场主体稳步减少境外融资，有助于降低高杠杆经营、货币错配等风险。这些变化都属于正常的资本流动，在适度可控的范围内。真正以长期投资为目的的外方投资者仍在进入中国。中国外汇储备依然充裕，在世界范围内仍属于很高水平。随着人民币汇率形成机制不断完善以及人民币国际化推进，中国外汇储备有所增减是正常的，不必过分担忧。
There has been a recent drop in China's foreign reserves. This actually reflects improvement to the mix of local currency as well as foreign exchange assets and liabilities of domestic banks, enterprises and individuals. There are three main reasons: First, some assets in foreign exchanges were transferred from the central bank to domestic banks, enterprises and individuals, including an increase of US$56.9 billion in the balance of foreign reserve deposits of domestic banks in the first eight months of this year, with a US$27 billion increase in August alone. Second, outbound investment by domestic enterprises has grown rapidly. Third, domestic enterprises and other market entities are reducing foreign financing steadily, which helps reduce risks of high leverage operation and currency mismatch. These changes are normal capital flow, which is moderate and manageable. Foreign investors who aim at long-term gains are still investing in China. China's foreign exchange reserves remain abundant and is still very large by international standard. With improvement to the RMB exchange rate regime and progress in RMB internationalization, it is quite normal that China's foreign reserves may increase or decrease, and there is no need to overreact to it.
《华尔街日报》：很多在中国有大规模投资的美资以及其他外资公司都反映近年来在华投资环境发生变化，很多政策都会大幅向他们的中国同行业竞争者倾斜，因此对他们产生不公平影晌。美国商业团体多次提到诸如思科这样的美国信息技术公司常常会成为类似不公平政策的受害者。您如何回应这样的质疑？ 您对外资公司的期待有哪些？华为这样的中国信息科技公司也在抱怨他们在美国受到不公平待遇。您觉得两国是否有必要出台一些专门规则来处理信息技术公司面临的问题？
9. Many U.S. and other foreign companies that are invested heavily in China say that the business climate has changed and that they are subject to unfair regulation that favors Chinese competitors. U.S. business groups say companies that provide information technology like Cisco are being particularly targeted. What's your response to that? What do you expect from foreign companies? Chinese information technology companies like Huawei also complain of business difficulties in the U.S. Do both countries need to work out special rules for info-tech products?
习近平：利用外资是我们的长期方针。中国利用外资的政策不会变，对外商投资企业合法权益的保障不会变，为各国企业在华投资兴业提供更好服务的方向不会变。吸收外资给中国现代化建设提供了必要的资金、先进的技术、宝贵的管理经验、众多的国际化人才，对促进中国经济发展发挥了积极作用。
XI:Attracting foreign investment is our long-term policy. Such policy will not change. Nor will our protection of the lawful rights and interests of foreign companies in China, and our commitment to better services in favor of foreign companies in China. Foreign investment, which has provided China with capital, advanced technologies, managerial expertise and professional talents with international vision, all needed for the country's modernization drive, has played a significant role in promoting China's economic development.
中国尊重非歧视性规则的国际营商惯例，遵守国民待遇等入世承诺，公平公正对待包括外商投资企业在内的所有市场主体，欢迎跨国公司同中国企业开展各种形式合作。近年来，中国采取了一系列措施，推进投资便利化，大幅度取消限制类项目，推动以准入前国民待遇加负面清单的管理模式，及时解决外国投资者合理关切，保护他们的合法权益，努力营造公开透明的法律政策环境、高效的行政环境、平等竞争的市场环境。
Chinarespects international business practice of non-discrimination and has fulfilled its national treatment and other commitments upon WTO accession. We give equal and fair treatment to all market players, including foreign-invested companies in China, and welcome all forms of cooperation between transnational corporations and their Chinese counterparts. In recent years, China has taken a series of investment facilitation steps, significantly cancelling restrictive items and adopting a management model based on pre-establishment national treatment plus negative list approach. By so doing, we aim to timely address the legitimate concerns of foreign investors, protect their lawful rights and interests, and foster a level playing field with open and transparent laws and policies, along with a more efficient administration.
联合国贸易和发展会议等国际权威机构调查表明，中国依然是当前全球最具吸引力的投资东道国。有关中国投资环境发生变化、外资对中国失去信心的说法很不符合实际。2014年，中国吸引外资规模居世界第一，达到1200亿美元，连续23年保持发展中国家首位。今年头8个月，中国实际利用外资853亿美元，同比增长9%。中国将进一步放宽对外商投资的市场准入，同时也要健全外商投资监管体系，修订外商投资相关法律，依法保障外商投资企业合法权益。
According to surveys by the U.N. Conference on Trade and Development (Unctad) and other authoritative international bodies, China remains the world's most attractive investment destination. Claims about a changing investment climate in China and foreign investors losing confidence in China are not backed by facts. In 2014, China received US$120 billion in foreign investment, more than any other country, and continued to be the leading destination among the developing countries for 23 years running. In the first eight months of this year, the actual amount of foreign investment used by China totaled US$85.3 billion, up by 9% from the corresponding period of the previous year. China will further ease market access for foreign investment. At the same time, we will improve regulations on foreign investment, amend relevant laws and better protect the lawful rights and interests of foreign investment in China.
希望外国市场的大门也能对中国投资者敞开。我们反对任何形式的保护主义、反对任何形式的歧视性政策，愿通过协商妥善解决同有关国家的经贸分歧，积极推动建立均衡、共赢、关注发展的多边经贸体制。
It is my hope that other countries will keep their markets open to Chinese investors. We are against protectionism and discriminative policies of all forms, stand ready to properly settle economic and trade disputes with relevant countries through consultation, and promote a balanced multilateral economic and trade system that focuses on development and seeks win-win results.
《华尔街日报》：中国政府近年来对互联网相关政策和法律进行了调整和强化，出台了很多针对互联网的言论，尤其是在社交媒体上发表言论的禁令。包括《华尔街日报》网站在内的很多外国网站在大陆地区陆续被封。之前发布的相关法律草案也让外国非营利组织机构担忧其在中国的活动会进一步受到限制。中国还是否会对外开放，或是中国政府担心外国的影响会导致中国出现社会动荡？
10. The government has placed new restrictions and passed laws that limit expression on the Internet, particularly social media. Foreign news sites - including those of The Wall Street Journal - have been blocked. Foreign nonprofit groups, meanwhile, are alarmed by a proposed law that would place conditions on their operations in China. Is China opening up, or is the government concerned that foreign influence may cause turmoil in Chinese society?
习近平：互联网作为20世纪最伟大的发明之一，把世界变成了“地球村”，深刻改变着人们的生产生活，有力推动着社会发展，具有高度全球化的特性。但是，这块“新疆域”不是“法外之地”，同样要讲法治，同样要维护国家主权、安全、发展利益。
XI:As one of the greatest inventions of the 20th century, the Internet has turned the world into a global village by profoundly changing the way people live and work and vigorously boosting social development. Though highly global, this new frontier is by no means a land beyond law. Rule of law also applies to the Internet, with the need to safeguard a country's sovereignty, security and development interests as relevant as in the real world.
网络空间与现实社会一样，既要提倡自由，也要遵守秩序。自由是秩序的目的，秩序是自由的保障。我们既要充分尊重网民交流思想、表达意愿的权利，也要构建良好的网络秩序，这也是为了更好保障广大网民合法权益。中国互联网蓬勃发展，为各国企业提供了广阔的发展机遇和市场空间。只要遵守中国法律法规，不损害中国国家利益和消费者利益，我们欢迎外国企业在华发展，尊重和保护外国企业合法利益。国际社会要本着相互尊重和相互信任的原则，共同构建和平、安全、开放、合作的网络空间。
Freedom and order must be upheld side by side in both cyberspace and the physical world. Freedom is the purpose of order, and order the guarantee of freedom. We need to fully respect netizens' rights to express themselves, while at the same time, ensure a sound cyberspace order to better protect the lawful rights and interests of all netizens. China's Internet is booming, providing immense opportunities and market horizon for businesses around the world. We welcome all foreign companies in China and will respect and protect their lawful rights and interests provided that they abide by the laws and regulations of China and do nothing to undermine China's national interests and interests of Chinese consumers. The international community as a whole should work together to build a peaceful, secure, open and cooperative cyberspace on the basis of the principles of mutual respect and mutual trust.
中国肯定境外非营利组织的积极作用，欢迎和支持他们来华发展，我们愿继续提供必要的便利和协助。中国重视境外非营利组织在华活动的服务管理工作，依法规范他们在华活动，保障他们在华合法权益。境外非营利组织在中国活动应该遵守中国法律，依法、规范、有序开展活动。
China recognizes the positive role of foreign nonprofit organizations (NPOs), welcomes and supports their development in China, and stands ready to provide them with necessary facilitation and assistance. Taking seriously the provision of services to and regulation of foreign NPOs in China, we will regulate, in accordance with law, their activities and protect their lawful rights and interests. All foreign NPOs should obey Chinese law and carry out their activities on a law-abiding and orderly basis.
《华尔街日报》：大规模反腐是您在国内最受欢迎的行动之一。如何确保反腐行动能够更加以规则和机制为基础？官员财产公开是否会推行？有商界人士认为反腐影响了经济发展，您是否会为了提升经济而放松在反腐方面的努力？
11. The anticorruption campaign you began has been among your most popular initiatives at home. What is being done to base anticorruption efforts more on rules and institutions? Will officials be required to report their assets publicly? Businesspeople have complained that the campaign is hurting the economy. Are you prepared to relax the crackdown to help the economy?
反腐败是世界各国面临的共同任务，也是民心所向。中国共产党的根本宗旨是全心全意为人民服务，中国共产党执政的基础是人民拥护，必须保持同人民群众的血肉联系。中国共产党不是生活在真空中，党内肯定会有这样那样的问题，腐败问题就是其中一个顽症。中国共产党敢于直面问题、纠正错误，善于自我净化、自我革新。人民群众最痛恨腐败，我们必须顺应民心。所以，要“老虎”、“苍蝇”一起打。中共十八大以来，我们加大了反腐败斗争力度，依法查处了一大批腐败分子，包括查处了曾经身居很高职位的一些人，赢得了中国人民支持和赞扬。
XI: Cracking down on corruption is what all countries must do and what their peoples wish to see. The ultimate purpose of the Chinese Communist Party is to serve the people wholeheartedly. Our Party owes its governing status to the support of the people, so we must maintain its flesh-and-blood ties with the people. The Party does not operate in a vacuum, so it has unavoidably found itself with problems of one kind or another. Corruption is just such a persistent one. The Party must be courageous enough to face up to the problem and go out to correct it through self-purification and self-rectification. Our people hate corruption more than anything else and we must act to allay their concerns. Therefore, we decided to go after both “tigers and flies,” wrongdoers regardless of their ranks. Since the the 18th CPC National congress, we have intensified anticorruption efforts, dealt with a large number of corrupt officials in accordance with law, including some who used to hold very high offices, and won extensive support and thumbs-up from the Chinese people.
关于反腐败制度建设，我有两句话，一句是“把权力关进制度的笼子里”，一句是“阳光是最好的防腐剂”。随着反腐败斗争向纵深推进，我们要着力形成不敢腐、不能腐、不想腐的体制机制。我们正在制定和完善相关法律法规，扎细扎密扎牢制度的笼子，真正把权力关进其中。关于官员财产公开，我们在2010年就通过有关规定，将领导干部收入等涉及财产性内容列入个人报告事项，每年定期抽查核实，现在核实的比例不断提高，任何人都不能例外。对不如实报告的人，我们有硬性的处理措施。
the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of ChinaOn institutional building in this respect, let me share with you two remarks I made. The first is that we must keep power in the cage of systemic checks. The other one is, transparency is the best precaution against corruption. As we go further in the anticorruption campaign, we will focus more on institutional building so that officials will not dare and cannot afford to be corrupt and, more importantly, have no desire to take that course. Right now, we are formulating and updating relevant laws and regulations to truly put power inside a more closely-knit cage of effective checks. With respect to asset disclosure by officials, we adopted relevant regulations back in 2010 to require such reporting which was subject to random check and verification every year. The proportion of verified reporting has increased steadily, and no one would take exception. Should anyone be found to be dishonest, they will be punished accordingly.
我说过，反腐没有休止符。我们将坚持零容忍的态度不变、猛药去病的决心不减、刮骨疗伤的勇气不泄、严厉惩处的尺度不松，做到有腐必反、有贪必肃。反腐败不会影响经济发展。惩治腐败，打击权力寻租，可以推动建设廉洁政府，推动清除阻碍市场机制运行的障碍，促进规则公平，创造更好的投资营商环境。
I once said that the fight against corruption never ends. Our zero tolerance to corruption will never change. Nor will our determination, courage and severity with which we punish it in order to rid the Party of corruption. All acts of corruption must be dealt with. Anticorruption efforts will not hurt the economy. On the contrary, fighting corruption, including such malpractices as rent-seeking, will help build a clean government, remove hurdles that impede market operations, promote fair rules and bring about a better investment and business environment.
《华尔街日报》：作为中国国家主席，您出访了世界上很多国家，您的夫人彭丽媛女士因为她作为联合国亲善大使的工作被大家熟知。从您个人经验来看，您觉得美国和世界上其他国家对中国有哪些不理解的地方？而中国老百姓又对美国和世界上其他国家有哪些不理解的地方？
12. You've traveled widely as China's leader, and your wife is well-known for her work as a U.N. goodwill ambassador. From your experiences, what do you think the U.S. and the rest of the world don't understand about China, and similarly what do many Chinese not get about the U.S. and the rest of the world?
习近平：1985年，也就是30年前，我曾率团前往艾奥瓦州考察农业技术，那是我第一次到访美国。美国的先进技术和美国人民的热情友好都给我留下了深刻印象。此后，我多次来过美国，也在中国接待过许多美国友人。从这些交往中，我切身体会到中美两国人民相互怀着十分友好的感情。我的夫人长期从事声乐表演和教学工作，近年来担任了世界卫生组织结核病和艾滋病防治亲善大使、联合国教科文组织促进女童和妇女教育特使，同包括美国在内的各国机构和人士有很多交流，她也有同样的感受。
XI:Thirty years ago in 1985, I led a delegation to Iowa to study agricultural technology. It was my first visit to the U.S. I was deeply impressed with the advanced U.S. technology and the warmth and friendship of the American people. Since then, I have made several trips to the U.S. and hosted many American friends in China. I could tell from these personal experiences that the Chinese and Americans cherish very friendly sentiments toward each other. My wife is a performing artist and music professor. In recent years, as the WHO Goodwill Ambassador for Tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS and the Unesco special envoy for the Advancement of Girls' and Women's Education, she has met many Americans and people from organizations of other countries. She shares my impressions.
国与国交往始于人民。中美两国人民的交往和友谊源远流长。早在230多年前，美国商船“中国皇后号”远渡重洋来到中国。70多年前，在中国人民奋起抗击日本军国主义侵略斗争中，美国人民跨越海洋和地心引力气义无反顾前来中国帮助我们。36年前，中美建立外交关系，揭开两国人民友好交往新的一页。实践证明，中美两国友好可以跨越时空。
Interactions between countries start with their people. Exchanges and friendship between our two peoples have a long history. Over 230 years ago, U.S. merchant vessel Empress of China sailed across vast oceans to China. Over 70 years ago, American people resolutely defied sea and gravity to help the Chinese people in their heroic fight against the aggression of Japanese militarists. Thirty-six years ago, China and the U.S. established diplomatic ties, turning a new chapter in the annals of friendly exchanges between the two peoples. What has happened proves that China-U.S. friendship transcends time and space.
中国古代思想家孟子说过：“物之不齐，物之情也。”国与国之间的确存在相互不理解的问题，但这就是生活。既然世界上存在着不同的民族、历史、文化、宗教、 制度、发展水平、生活方式，那就肯定会存在一些相互不那么好理解的事情。但是，我认为，一切看上去不可理解的事情都是可以理解的，关键是要想去理解并努力去理解，而不要排斥。丰富多彩的人类文明都有自己存在的价值。本国本民族要珍惜和维护自己的思想文化，也要承认和尊重别国别民族的思想文化。强调承认和尊重本国本民族的文明成果，不是要搞自我封闭，更不是要搞唯我独尊。“独学而无友，则孤陋而寡闻。”对人类社会创造的各种文明，我们都应该采取学习借鉴的态度，把跨越时空、超越国度、富有永恒魅力、具有当代价值的优秀文化精神弘扬起来。中国愿同包括美国在内的国际社会一道，在发展中谋共赢，在合作中同进步， 让中国人民更加幸福，让世界人民共享和平与发展成果。
As an ancient Chinese philosopher Mencius said, “It's only natural for things to be different.” Lack of understanding between countries is indeed a question, but this is life. With so much difference in ethnicity, history, culture, religion, social system, development level and lifestyle, there are things about others that one may find hard to understand. This is for sure, but that said, it is also true that anything that is seemingly incomprehensible can be understood provided that one is ready to learn and make an effort to understand it instead of dismissing it altogether. Every civilization, distinct and colorful as it is, possesses the value for its existence. A country or a nation should cherish and protect its own culture and values, and at the same time, recognize and respect those of others. While feeling proud of one's own cultural achievements, a country or a nation must not shut its door to the outside, still less, indulge in self-aggrandizement. As an old Chinese saying goes, “Learning alone without exchanges with others will lead to ignorance.” We should be ready to learn from other civilizations and carry forward their time-honored values that transcend national borders and retain appeal in modern times. China is ready to work with the U.S. and others in the international community with a view to seeking common progress through win-win cooperation, so as to deliver greater happiness to the Chinese people and ensure peace and development for the people around the world.
