36. 习近平在二十国集团领导人第十三次峰会第一阶段会议上的讲话
登高望远，牢牢把握世界经济正确方向
Look Beyond the Horizon and Steer the World Economy in the Right Direction
——在二十国集团领导人峰会第一阶段会议上的发言
（2018年11月30日，布宜诺斯艾利斯）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At Session I of the G20 Summit
Buenos Aires, 30 November 2018 尊敬的马克里总统，
各位同事：
President Mauricio Macri,
Dear Colleagues, 
今年是国际金融危机发生10周年，也是二十国集团领导人峰会10周年。尽管世界经济整体保持增长，但危机的深层次影响仍未消除，经济增长新旧动能转换尚未完成，各类风险加快积聚。新一轮科技革命和产业变革引发深刻变化，贫富差距和社会矛盾压力不断增加。世界经济再一次面临历史性的选择。
It's been ten years since the global financial crisis broke out and the first G20 Summit was convened. Today, the global economy, while maintaining growth on the whole, is still not free from the underlying impacts of the crisis. Old growth drivers are yet to be replaced by new ones. Various risks are rapidly building up. The new round of technological revolution and industrial transformation are triggering profound changes, the wealth gap keeps widening, and social contradictions are growing. The world economy is facing another historical choice. 
“以史为鉴，可以知兴替。”二十国集团要从历史大势中把握规律，引领方向。人类发展进步大潮滚滚向前，世界经济时有波折起伏，但各国走向开放、走向融合的大趋势没有改变。产业链、价值链、供应链不断延伸和拓展，带动了生产要素全球流动，助力数十亿人口脱贫致富。各国相互协作、优势互补是生产力发展的客观要求，也代表着生产关系演变的前进方向。在这一进程中，各国逐渐形成利益共同体、责任共同体、命运共同体。无论前途是晴是雨，携手合作、互利共赢是唯一正确选择。这既是经济规律使然，也符合人类社会发展的历史逻辑。面对重重挑战，我们既要增强紧迫感，也要保持理性，登高望远，以负责任态度把握世界经济大方向。
An ancient Chinese philosopher observed that "Reviewing the past enables us to learn about the law governing the evolution of history." We G20 members must closely follow the underlying historical trend so as to chart the course for the future. In mankind's relentless quest for development and progress, the trend toward openness and integration among countries is unstoppable despite ups and downs in the global economy. The ever growing and expanding industrial chain, value chain and supply chain have boosted the flow of production factors across the world and led several billion people out of poverty and toward prosperity. Greater coordination and complementarity among countries meet the need of productivity growth. They will also shape the future of relations of production. In this process, countries are increasingly becoming a community with shared interests, shared responsibilities and a shared future. Going forward, win-win cooperation is the only choice for us, be it in good times or bad. This is dictated by the law of economics, and it is in keeping with the development of human history. Facing various challenges, we must have a stronger sense of urgency, be rational in approach and look beyond the horizon. We must fulfill our responsibility and steer the global economy in the right direction. 
保持世界经济稳定发展的共同需要催生了二十国集团。10年来，我们同舟共济、勠力同心，推动世界经济走出衰退深渊，走上了复苏增长的轨道。10年后，我们应该再次拿出勇气，展示战略视野，引领世界经济沿着正确轨道向前发展。
The G20 was born out of the international community's need to maintain stable growth of the global economy. Over the past decade, we have braced difficulties together, navigated the global economy out of recession and brought it back to the track of recovery and growth. Ten years later, let us work with the same courage and strategic vision and ensure that the global economy grows on the right track. 
第一，坚持开放合作，维护多边贸易体制。5年前，我第一次出席二十国集团领导人峰会，呼吁共同维护和建设开放型世界经济。现在看，这一任务更加迫切。二十国集团成员间月均新增贸易限制措施比半年前翻了一番，2018年全球货物贸易量增速可能下滑0.3%。我们应该坚定维护自由贸易和基于规则的多边贸易体制。中方赞成对世界贸易组织进行必要改革，关键是要维护开放、包容、非歧视等世界贸易组织核心价值和基本原则，保障发展中国家发展利益和政策空间。要坚持各方广泛协商，循序推进，不搞“一言堂”。
First, we should stay committed to openness and cooperation and uphold the multilateral trading system. Five years ago when I attended the G20 Summit for the first time, I called for joint efforts to uphold and build an open world economy. Five years on, this has obviously become an even more urgent task for us. The number of new trade restrictive measures applied on a monthly basis among G20 members has doubled compared with six months ago. In 2018, the growth of trade in goods may decline by 0.3 percent globally. We should firmly uphold free trade and the rules-based multilateral trading system. China supports necessary reform of the World Trade Organization, and believes that it is critical to uphold the WTO's core values and fundamental principles such as openness, inclusiveness and non-discrimination and ensure the development interests and policy space of developing countries. We need to conduct extensive consultation to achieve gradual progress instead of imposing one's position on others. 
第二，坚持伙伴精神，加强宏观政策协调。伙伴精神是二十国集团最宝贵的财富。无论遇到什么困难，二十国集团成员都应该团结一致，共克时艰。各方应该坚持财政、货币、结构性改革“三位一体”的政策工具，努力推动世界经济强劲、平衡、可持续、包容增长。加强政策协调，既是世界经济增长的客观需要，也是主要经济体理应担负的责任。发达经济体在采取货币和财政政策时，应该更加关注并努力减少对新兴市场国家和发展中国家的冲击。国际货币基金组织第十五轮份额总检查应该按期完成，国际货币体系应该继续朝着多元化方向迈进，要构筑更加牢固的全球金融安全网。
Second, we should forge strong partnership and step up macro policy coordination. Partnership is the most valuable asset of the G20. We G20 members should work together to surmount whatever difficulty that lies ahead. We should employ the three tools of fiscal and monetary policies and structural reform in a holistic way to ensure strong, balanced, sustainable and inclusive growth of the global economy. Strengthening policy coordination, which is essential for global growth, is also the due responsibility of major economies. Developed economies, when adopting monetary and fiscal policies, should give more consideration to and work to minimize the impact such policies may exert on emerging markets and developing economies. The IMF's 15th General Quota Review should be concluded on schedule. The international monetary system should become more diversified, and the global financial safety net should continue to be strengthened. 
第三，坚持创新引领，挖掘经济增长动力。世界经济数字化转型是大势所趋，新的工业革命将深刻重塑人类社会。我们既要鼓励创新，促进数字经济和实体经济深度融合，也要关注新技术应用带来的风险挑战，加强制度和法律体系建设，重视教育和就业培训。我们既要立足自身发展，充分发掘创新潜力，也要敞开大门，鼓励新技术、新知识传播，让创新造福更多国家和人民。为更好引领和适应技术创新，建议二十国集团将“新技术应用及其影响”作为一项重点工作深入研究，认真探索合作思路和举措。
Third, we should stay committed to innovation and create new momentum for growth. The global economy is embracing the trend of digital transformation, and the new round of industrial revolution will reshape human society in profound ways. We should encourage innovation and leverage the role of the digital economy in growing the real economy. We need to watch out for risks and challenges brought by the application of new technologies, and strengthen the legal and regulatory framework. And we need to do more to boost education and vocational training. We should give priority to achieving development through fully tapping our innovation potential. At the same time, we also need to keep our doors open and encourage the spread of new technologies and knowledge so that innovation will benefit more countries and peoples. To better adapt to and guide technological innovation, I propose that the G20 carry out an in-depth study on the application and impact of new technologies on a priority basis to explore new thinking and new ways of cooperation in this area. 
第四，坚持普惠共赢，促进全球包容发展。当今世界面临的很多问题，归根结底都和发展问题相关。发展也是实现公平公正的强有力支撑。我们要坚持以人民为中心的发展思想，将人民的获得感、幸福感、安全感作为工作出发点和落脚点。要继续把发展问题置于全球宏观政策协调的突出位置，落实好2030年可持续发展议程，为联合国框架内有关工作提供有力支持。要维护发展中国家发展利益和空间，支持世界经济真正公平发展。要继续支持非洲发展，帮助非洲加强基础设施建设和互联互通，推进新工业化进程。
Fourth, we should stay committed to win-win cooperation to promote inclusive global development. Development holds the key to many problems facing the world today. Development also provides a strong guarantee for greater equity and justice. We need to continue to follow a people-centered development philosophy and endeavor to deliver a sense of fulfillment, happiness and security to our people. We need to continue to prioritize development in global macro-policy coordination, implement in real earnest the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and give strong support to work in this area under the UN framework. We should protect the development interests and space of developing countries so as to ensure global growth that is truly equitable. We should continue to support Africa's development by helping Africa with its infrastructure and connectivity building and new industrialization. 
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues, 
今年是中国改革开放40周年。40年来，在国际社会支持下，中国人民通过不懈奋斗，取得了历史性发展成就。国际金融危机发生以来，中国经济对世界经济增长贡献率超过30%。中国下决心将减贫进行到底，到2020年彻底消除现行标准下的绝对贫困，这个目标一定会实现。中国得益于改革开放，中国将坚定不移沿着这条路走下去。前不久，中国成功举办首届国际进口博览会，赢得国际社会广泛赞誉。中国将继续深化市场化改革，保护产权和知识产权，鼓励公平竞争，主动扩大进口。今后，我们将每年举办中国国际进口博览会，向世界进一步敞开中国市场。在世界银行最新《营商环境报告》中，中国排名较前一年上升32位。我们将继续朝着这一方向不懈努力。中方希望各国共同营造自由、开放、包容、有序的国际经济大环境。
This year marks the 40th anniversary of China's reform and opening-up. During the past 40 years, with the support of the international community, we in China have forged ahead with perseverance and made historic achievements in development. In the years since the global financial crisis, China has contributed over 30 percent of global growth. China is firm in its resolve to eradicate poverty. Our goal is to eliminate absolute poverty as currently defined by 2020, and we have every confidence to meet this target. China owes its progress to reform and opening-up, and will continue to advance on this path. Earlier this month, the first China International Import Expo (CIIE) was successfully held, which was warmly received by the international community. China will continue to deepen market-oriented reform, protect property rights and IPR, encourage fair competition and do more to expand imports. The CIIE will be held annually as a way to further open China's market. In the latest World Bank Doing Business report, China moved up 32 places in the ease of doing business ranking from last year. China will continue to improve its business environment, and hopes that all countries will work together for a free, open, inclusive and orderly international economic environment. 
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
