80. 习近平G20杭州峰会开幕式致辞
构建创新、活力、联动、包容的世界经济
Towards an Innovative, Invigorated, Interconnected and Inclusive World Economy
——习近平在G20峰会开幕式上的讲话
Statement on the Opening Ceremony by H.E. Xi Jinping
at the G20 Hangzhou Summit
中华人民共和国主席
President of the People’s Republic of China
2016年9月4日，杭州
Hangzhou, 4 September 2016Dear Colleagues,
各位同事：
The G20 Hangzhou Summit now begins.
我宣布，二十国集团领导人杭州峰会开幕！
It gives me great pleasure to meet you here in Hangzhou, and I wish to extend a warm welcome to you all.
很高兴同大家相聚杭州。首先，我谨对各位同事的到来，表示热烈欢迎！
The G20 Summit in Antalya last year was a big success. I wish to use this opportunity to thank Turkey once again for its outstanding job and the positive outcomes achieved during its presidency. Under the theme “Collective Action for Inclusive and Robust Growth”, Turkey brought about progress in inclusiveness, implementation and investment. China highly commends Turkey’s efforts on various fronts during its G20 presidency.
去年，二十国集团领导人安塔利亚峰会开得很成功。我也愿借此机会，再次感谢去年主席国土耳其的出色工作和取得的积极成果。土耳其以“共同行动以实现包容和稳健增长”作为峰会主题，从“包容、落实、投资”三方面推动产生成果，中国一直积极评价土耳其在担任主席国期间开展的各项工作。
Last November in Antalya, I talked to you about Hangzhou by quoting a Chinese saying, “Up in heaven, there is paradise; down on earth, there are Suzhou and Hangzhou.” And I said that I trust the Hangzhou Summit will be a unique setting where history is blended with modernity. I am glad you have accepted my invitation and come to Hangzhou. Present here are old and new friends of mine, and we will discuss ways to sustain global growth.
去年11月，我在安塔利亚向大家介绍，上有天堂，下有苏杭，相信杭州峰会将给大家呈现一种历史和现实交汇的独特韵味。今天，当时的邀请已经变成现实。在座的有老朋友，也有新朋友，大家齐聚杭州，共商世界经济发展大计。
In the next two days, under the theme of the Summit, we will have discussions on strengthening policy coordination, breaking a new path for growth, more effective and efficient global economic and financial governance, robust international trade and investment, inclusive and interconnected development, as well as other issues affecting the world economy.
未来两天，我们将围绕峰会主题，就加强宏观政策协调、创新增长方式，更高效的全球经济金融治理，强劲的国际贸易和投资，包容和联动式发展，影响世界经济的其他突出问题等议题展开讨论。
Eight years ago, at the height of the international financial crisis, the G20, acting in a spirit of unity and partnership, pulled the world economy back from the precipice and pushed it onto the track of stability and recovery. Thanks to this daring initiative, unity prevailed over differences and common good prevailed over selfish interests. The crisis focused global attention on the G20 and established it as the premier forum for international economic cooperation.
8年前，在国际金融危机最紧要关头，二十国集团临危受命，秉持同舟共济的伙伴精神，把正在滑向悬崖的世界经济拉回到稳定和复苏轨道。这是一次创举，团结战胜了分歧，共赢取代了私利。这场危机，让人们记住了二十国集团，也确立了二十国集团作为国际经济合作主要论坛的地位。
Today, eight years on, the global economy has again reached a critical juncture. The conventional engines driving global growth over the past decades, such as scientific and technological progress, population growth and economic globalization, have entered a transitional period, and their ability to stimulate global growth is notably weaker. The growth momentum generated by the last round of scientific and technological progress is diminishing, while the new round of scientific and industrial revolution has just started. Population aging is happening in all major economies, and the decline in population growth puts economic and social pressure on countries. Economic globalization is suffering setbacks, protectionism and inward-looking trends are on the rise, and the multilateral trading regime is under pressure. Despite notable progress made in financial regulatory reform, the risks of excessive leverage and bubbles continue to build up. To ensure that the financial market effectively meets the need of the real economy while maintaining stability remains a major challenge to the international community.
8年后的今天，世界经济又走到一个关键当口。科技进步、人口增长、经济全球化等过去数十年推动世界经济增长的主要引擎都先后进入换挡期，对世界经济的拉动作用明显减弱。上一轮科技进步带来的增长动能逐渐衰减，新一轮科技和产业革命尚未形成势头。主要经济体先后进入老龄化社会，人口增长率下降，给各国经济社会带来压力。经济全球化出现波折，保护主义、内顾倾向抬头，多边贸易体制受到冲击。金融监管改革虽有明显进展，但高杠杆、高泡沫等风险仍在积聚。如何让金融市场在保持稳定的同时有效服务实体经济，仍然是各国需要解决的重要课题。
Under the impact of all these factors, the global economy, while still on the road to recovery, faces multiple risks and challenges such as weak growth momentum, sluggish demand, volatility in the financial market and low growth in international trade and investment.
在这些因素综合作用下，世界经济虽然总体保持复苏态势，但面临增长动力不足、需求不振、金融市场反复动荡、国际贸易和投资持续低迷等多重风险和挑战。
The G20 consists of the world’s major economies. Its critical role and impact place the G20 at the forefront of the global efforts to tackle risks and challenges and expand the space of growth. The international community has great expectation for the G20 and places high hopes on the Hangzhou Summit. In response, we should find solutions to the problems we face through both individual and collective efforts. I hope the Hangzhou Summit will build on previous progress to provide a solution that addresses both the symptoms and root causes of the global economic problems and achieve strong, sustainable, balanced and inclusive global growth.
二十国集团聚集了世界主要经济体，影响和作用举足轻重，也身处应对风险挑战、开拓增长空间的最前沿。国际社会对二十国集团充满期待，对这次峰会寄予厚望。我们需要通过各自行动和集体合力，直面问题，共寻答案。希望杭州峰会能够在以往的基础上，为世界经济开出一剂标本兼治、综合施策的药方，让世界经济走上强劲、可持续、平衡、包容增长之路。
First, in the face of these challenges, we should strengthen macroeconomic policy coordination and jointly promote global growth and uphold international financial stability. The G20 members should pursue more comprehensive macroeconomic policies in keeping with their own national realities and employ various policy tools, including fiscal, monetary and structural reform policies, to expand aggregate global demand, improve the quality of supply and bolster the foundation of growth. We should, in conjunction with the formulation and implementation of the Hangzhou Action Plan, continue to strengthen policy coordination, reduce negative spillovers, and work together to uphold financial stability and boost market confidence.
第一，面对当前挑战，我们应该加强宏观经济政策协调，合力促进全球经济增长、维护金融稳定。二十国集团成员应该结合本国实际，采取更加全面的宏观经济政策，使用多种有效政策工具，统筹兼顾财政、货币、结构性改革政策，努力扩大全球总需求，全面改善供给质量，巩固经济增长基础。应该结合制定和落实《杭州行动计划》，继续加强政策协调，减少负面外溢效应，共同维护金融稳定，提振市场信心。
Second, in the face of these challenges, we should break a new path for growth and generate new growth momentum. The G20 should change its policy approach, and place equal importance on both short-term and medium- to long-term policies and both demand-side management and supply-side reform. This year, we have agreed on the G20 Blueprint on Innovative Growth and made the unanimous decision to break a new path and expand new frontier for the world economy through innovation, structural reform, new industrial revolution and the development of digital economy. We should stay committed to these initiatives to remove the root cause of sluggish recovery and weak growth that plagues the global economy, and lay a solid foundation for achieving a new round of global growth and prosperity.
第二，面对当前挑战，我们应该创新发展方式，挖掘增长动能。二十国集团应该调整政策思路，做到短期政策和中长期政策并重，需求侧管理和供给侧改革并重。今年，我们已经就《二十国集团创新增长蓝图》达成共识，一致决定通过创新、结构性改革、新工业革命、数字经济等新方式，为世界经济开辟新道路，拓展新边界。要沿着这一方向坚定走下去，帮助世界经济彻底摆脱复苏乏力、增长脆弱的局面，为世界经济迎来新一轮增长和繁荣打下坚实基础。
Third, in the face of these challenges, we should improve global economic governance and strengthen institutional safeguards. The G20 should continue to improve the international monetary and financial systems and the governance structure of international financial institutions and fully leverage the role of the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights. We should strengthen the global financial safety net, and enhance cooperation in financial regulation, international taxation and combating corruption to boost the resilience of the world economy against risks. This year, we have restarted the G20 International Financial Architecture Working Group. I hope that the working group will continue its work and become more effective.
第三，面对当前挑战，我们应该完善全球经济治理，夯实机制保障。二十国集团应该不断完善国际货币金融体系，优化国际金融机构治理结构，充分发挥国际货币基金组织特别提款权作用。应该完善全球金融安全网，加强在金融监管、国际税收、反腐败领域合作，提高世界经济抗风险能力。今年，我们重启了二十国集团国际金融架构工作组，希望继续向前推进，不断提高有效性。
Fourth, in the face of these challenges, we should build an open global economy and continue to promote facilitation and liberalization of trade and investment. Protectionism is like drinking poison to quench one’s thirst: It may ease a country’s internal pressure in the short term, but will only inflict severe damage to the country itself and the world economy in the long run. The G20 should resolutely oppose the beggar-thy-neighbor policy, and advocate and promote the building of an open global economy. We should honor our commitment of not adopting new protectionist measures, strengthen coordination and cooperation on investment policies and take credible steps to stimulate trade growth. Infrastructure connectivity should be enhanced so as to bring developing countries and small and medium-sized companies into the global value chain and make the global economy more open and integrated.
第四，面对当前挑战，我们应该建设开放型世界经济，继续推动贸易和投资自由化便利化。保护主义政策如饮鸩止渴，看似短期内能缓解一国内部压力，但从长期看将给自身和世界经济造成难以弥补的伤害。二十国集团应该坚决避免以邻为壑，做开放型世界经济的倡导者和推动者，恪守不采取新的保护主义措施的承诺，加强投资政策协调合作，采取切实行动促进贸易增长。我们应该发挥基础设施互联互通的辐射效应和带动作用，帮助发展中国家和中小企业深入参与全球价值链，推动全球经济进一步开放、交流、融合。
Fifth, in the face of these challenges, we should implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and promote inclusive development. To achieve common development is the shared aspiration of all peoples, especially those of the developing countries. According to the relevant statistics, the Gini coefficient has exceeded the widely-recognized alarm level of 0.6 and reached around 0.7 globally. This is something that we must pay close attention to. This year, development is high on the G20 agenda, and we have committed ourselves to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and formulated an action plan. We will also support industrialization in Africa and the least developed countries, expand energy access and improve energy efficiency, encourage more consumption of clean and renewable energy, promote financial inclusion and encourage the young people to start their own businesses. Through these means and more, we can reduce the inequality and imbalance in global development and deliver the benefits of global growth to people of all countries.
第五，面对当前挑战，我们应该落实2030年可持续发展议程，促进包容性发展。实现共同发展是各国人民特别是发展中国家人民的普遍愿望。据有关统计，现在世界基尼系数已经达到0.7左右，超过了公认的0.6“危险线”，必须引起我们的高度关注。今年，我们把发展置于二十国集团议程的突出位置，共同承诺积极落实2030年可持续发展议程，并制定了行动计划。同时，我们还将通过支持非洲和最不发达国家工业化、提高能源可及性、提高能效、加强清洁能源和可再生能源利用、发展普惠金融、鼓励青年创业等方式，减少全球发展不平等和不平衡，使各国人民共享世界经济增长成果。
Dear Colleagues,
各位同事！
The G20 carries high expectation of the international community and shoulders a heavy responsibility. We must ensure that the G20 fully plays its role of keeping the world economy on the track of prosperity and stability.
二十国集团承载着世界各国期待，使命重大。我们要努力把二十国集团建设好，为世界经济繁荣稳定把握好大方向。
First, the G20 must keep up with the changing times and lead the way forward. The G20 should adapt itself to the needs of the global economy and further transform itself from a mechanism of crisis response to one of long-term governance. When major issues emerge, the G20 has the responsibility to play a leading role and, with strategic vision, set the direction and blaze the trail for global growth.
第一，与时俱进，发挥引领作用。二十国集团应该根据世界经济需要，调整自身发展方向，进一步从危机应对向长效治理机制转型。面对重大突出问题，二十国集团有责任发挥领导作用，展现战略视野，为世界经济指明方向，开拓路径。
Second, the G20 should fully honor its commitment. As a Chinese saying puts it, one thousand promises do not count as much as one real action.We should make the G20 an action team instead of a talk shop. This year, we have formulated action plans for many areas such as sustainable development, green finance, energy efficiency and combating corruption, and each and every plan should be implemented.
第二，知行合一，采取务实行动。承诺一千，不如落实一件。我们应该让二十国集团成为行动队，而不是清谈馆。今年，我们在可持续发展、绿色金融、提高能效、反腐败等诸多领域制定了行动计划，要把每一项行动落到实处。
Third, the G20 should become a platform of cooperation built through joint efforts that delivers benefits to all.We should continue to strengthen the institutional building of the G20 to sustain and deepen our cooperation. We should solicit proposals for improvement and heed the views of all countries, especially the developing countries, so as to make the G20 more inclusive and better respond to the demand of people of different countries.
第三，共建共享，打造合作平台。我们应该继续加强二十国集团机制建设，确保合作延续和深入。广纳良言，充分倾听世界各国特别是发展中国家声音，使二十国集团工作更具包容性，更好回应各国人民诉求。
Fourth, the G20 should stick together as partners in meeting challenges. Partnership is the most valuable asset of the G20. The G20 countries differ in national conditions, stages of development and face different challenges. But we all share a common goal of pursuing stronger growth, meeting challenges and achieving common development. So long as we stick together, we can navigate the heavy waves of the global economy and sail towards a future of growth.
第四，同舟共济，发扬伙伴精神。伙伴精神是二十国集团最宝贵的财富。我们虽然国情不同、发展阶段不同、面临的现实挑战不同，但推动经济增长的愿望相同，应对危机挑战的利益相同，实现共同发展的憧憬相同。只要我们坚持同舟共济的伙伴精神，就能够克服世界经济的惊涛骇浪，开辟未来增长的崭新航程。
Dear Colleagues,
各位同事！
In preparing for the Hangzhou Summit, China has followed the principle of openness, transparency and inclusiveness, and maintained close contact and coordination with all other members. We have also held dialogue of various forms with the United Nations, the African Union, the G77, the least developed countries, landlocked countries and small island states to brief them and all the people who show an interest in the G20 on our preparation. We have listened to the views and proposals of various parties and benefited greatly from them in making preparation for the Hangzhou Summit.
在杭州峰会筹备过程中，中国始终秉持开放、透明、包容的办会理念，同各成员保持密切沟通和协调。我们还举办了各种形式的外围对话，走进联合国，走进非盟总部，走进七十七国集团，走进最不发达国家、内陆国、小岛国，向世界各国，以及所有关心二十国集团的人们介绍杭州峰会筹备情况，倾听各方利益诉求。各方提出的意见和建议对这次峰会的筹备都发挥了重要作用。
I hope that during discussions in the coming two days, we will pool our vision and create synergy so as to enable the Hangzhou Summit to fulfill its mandate of boosting global growth, strengthening international economic cooperation and promoting the future growth of the G20.
我期待在接下来两天的讨论中，我们能够集众智、聚合力，努力让杭州峰会实现促进世界经济增长、加强国际经济合作、推动二十国集团发展的目标。
Let’s make Hangzhou a new departure point and steer the giant ship of the global economy on a new voyage from the shore of the Qiantang River to the vast ocean.
让我们以杭州为新起点，引领世界经济的航船，从钱塘江畔再次扬帆启航，驶向更加广阔的大海！
Thank you!
谢谢大家。
