3. 习近平在G20领导人利雅得峰会“守护地球”主题边会上的致辞
在二十国集团领导人利雅得峰会“守护地球”主题边会上的致辞
（2020年11月22日，北京）
中华人民共和国主席　习近平
Remarks by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People's Republic of China
At the Leaders' Side Event on Safeguarding the Planet of
The G20 Riyadh Summit
22 November 2020
各位同事，
朋友们：
Dear Colleagues,
Friends,
地球是我们的共同家园。我们要秉持人类命运共同体理念，携手应对气候环境领域挑战，守护好这颗蓝色星球。在此，我愿分享几点看法。
The Earth is our shared home. We may follow the vision of a community with a shared future for mankind and pitch in to tackle climate and other environmental challenges and protect the blue planet. Let me share with you my thoughts on what G20 could do:
第一，加大应对气候变化力度。二十国集团要继续发挥引领作用，在《联合国气候变化框架公约》指导下，推动应对气候变化《巴黎协定》全面有效实施。不久前，我宣布中国将提高国家自主贡献力度，力争二氧化碳排放2030年前达到峰值，2060年前实现碳中和。中国言出必行，将坚定不移加以落实。
First, we could strengthen our response to climate change. G20 should continue to take the lead in tackling climate change. We need to follow the guidance of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and push for the full and effective implementation of the Paris Agreement. Not long ago, I announced China's initiative to scale up its nationally determined contributions and strive to peak carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality by 2060. China will honor its commitment and see the implementation through.
第二，深入推进清洁能源转型。中方赞赏沙特提出碳循环经济理念，支持后疫情时代能源低碳转型，实现人人享有可持续能源目标。中国建成了全球最大的清洁能源系统，新能源汽车产销量连续5年居世界首位。根据“十四五”规划和2035年远景目标建议，中国将推动能源清洁低碳安全高效利用，加快新能源、绿色环保等产业发展，促进经济社会发展全面绿色转型。
Second, we could deepen the transition toward clean energy. China applauds Saudi Arabia's initiative on Circular Carbon Economy, and supports the shift to low-carbon energy in the post-COVID era to achieve the goal of Sustainable Energy for All. China has put in place the world's biggest clean energy system, and has led the world in the output and sales of new energy vehicles for five years running. Under the recommendations for formulating China's 14th five-year development plan and the long-range goals for 2035, China will pursue clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient use of energy and accelerate the growth of new energy and green industries to promote greener economic and social development in all respects.
第三，构筑尊重自然的生态系统。中方支持二十国集团在减少土地退化、保护珊瑚礁、应对海洋塑料垃圾等领域深化合作，打造更牢固的全球生态安全屏障。《生物多样性公约》第十五次缔约方大会将于明年5月在中国昆明举行，中方诚挚欢迎各方出席，期待大会为未来一个时期全球生物多样性保护设定目标，采取行动。让我们携起手来，共同建设清洁美丽的世界！
Third, we could protect the ecosystem with a respect for Nature. China supports deepening G20 cooperation in reducing land degradation, conserving coral reefs, and cleaning up plastic from the ocean. Through cooperation in these and many other areas, we could build a stronger defense for global ecological security. The 15th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity will be held in the Chinese city of Kunming in May next year. China welcomes the participation of all parties and hopes the meeting will set goals and take actions to ensure the protection of global biodiversity in the years ahead. Let us work together for a clean and beautiful world.
谢谢大家。
Thank you.
