56. 习近平在博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会开幕式上的主旨演讲
开放共创繁荣 创新引领未来
Openness for Greater Prosperity, Innovation for a Better Future
中华人民共和国主席习近平出席博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会开幕式并发表主旨演讲
Keynote Speech by H.E. Xi Jinping
President of the People’s Republic of China
At the Opening of the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2018
Boao, 10 April 2018
尊敬的各位元首，
政府首脑，
国际组织负责人，部长，
尊敬的各位博鳌亚洲论坛现任和候任理事
各位来宾，女士们，先生们，朋友们：
Your Excellencies Heads of State and Government,
Heads of International Organizations,
Ministers,
Incumbent and Incoming Members of the Board of Directors of the Boao Forum for Asia,
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Friends,
仲春时节的海南，山青海碧，日暖风轻。在这个美好的季节里，各国嘉宾汇聚一堂，出席博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会。海南有一首民歌唱道：“久久不见久久见，久久见过还想见。”大家就是这样，今天，有机会在此同各位新老朋友见面，我感到十分高兴。
Hainan today greets us with green mountains, blue ocean, gentle breeze and warm sunshine. In this beautiful season of spring, we gather here for the Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2018. Such a gathering of friends, both old and new, is always a pleasant occasion, and to quote the lyrics of a Hainan folk song, “It has been a long time since we last met, and I hope it will be a long time before we have to part.”
首先，我谨代表中国政府和中国人民，并以我个人名义，对各位嘉宾的到来表示诚挚的欢迎！对年会的召开表示热烈的祝贺！
Let me begin by extending, on behalf of the Chinese government and people and in my own name, sincere welcome to all the distinguished guests attending the Forum, and warm congratulations on the opening of the conference.
博鳌亚洲论坛成立以来，立足亚洲，面向世界，在凝聚亚洲共识、促进各方合作、推进经济全球化、推动构建人类命运共同体等方面建言献策，提出许多富有价值的“博鳌方案”，作出了积极贡献。今年是论坛理事会换届之年。借此机会，我谨向即将离任的各位理事表示衷心的感谢！对新当选的各位理事表示热烈的祝贺！
Since its inception, with a focus on Asia and a global perspective, the Boao Forum for Asia has hosted active discussions and produced many valuable “Boao proposals” that have helped build consensus in Asia, encourage cooperation, promote economic globalization and advance the building of a community with a shared future for mankind. The Forum has just had a major change of its Board of Directors this year and I wish to take this opportunity to express our heartfelt thanks to the outgoing members and warm congratulations to the new ones.
本届年会以“开放创新的亚洲，繁荣发展的世界”为主题，顺应时代潮流，符合各方期待。相信各位嘉宾和各界人士将畅所欲言，提出真知灼见。
The theme of this year’s conference is “An Open and Innovative Asia for a World of Greater Prosperity.” It is in line with the trend of the times and reflects the expectation of all parties. I am sure your engaging discussions here will produce many insights.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
历史，总是在一些特殊年份给人们以汲取智慧、继续前行的力量。2018年是中国改革开放40周年，也是海南建省办经济特区30周年。海南省可谓是“因改革开放而生，因改革开放而兴”。改革开放以来，海南从一个较为封闭落后的边陲岛屿，发展成为中国最开放、最具活力的地区之一，经济社会发展取得巨大成就。
There are certain historic occasions that empower us with the wisdom and strength to move forward. This year marks the 40th anniversary of China’s reform and opening-up, and the 30th anniversary of the establishment of the Province and Special Economic Zone of Hainan. It is reform and opening-up that has given life and prosperity to Hainan, that has turned it from the once backward and remote island into one of China’s most open and dynamic regions, and that has enabled Hainan to achieve phenomenal social and economic growth.
一滴水可以反映出太阳的光辉，一个地方可以体现一个国家的风貌。海南发展是中国40年改革开放的一个重要历史见证。
Just like the radiance of the sun is reflected by a drop of water, the development of a country may be epitomized by an individual region. Hainan stands as an important historical witness to China’s reform and opening-up over the past four decades.
1978年，在邓小平先生倡导下，以中共十一届三中全会为标志，中国开启了改革开放历史征程。从农村到城市，从试点到推广，从经济体制改革到全面深化改革，40年众志成城，40年砥砺奋进，40年春风化雨，中国人民用双手书写了国家和民族发展的壮丽史诗。
Thanks to the initiative of Mr. Deng Xiaoping, the Third Plenary Session of the 11th CPC Central Committee in 1978 marked the beginning of China's historic journey of reform and opening-up. Our endeavor started from rural areas to cities, from pilot programs to nationwide projects and from economic restructuring to the comprehensive deepening of reform. Reform and opening-up over the past four decades has made great impacts on China. With united and determined efforts, the Chinese people have added a glorious chapter to the development epic of the country and the nation.
——40年来，中国人民始终艰苦奋斗、顽强拼搏，极大解放和发展了中国社会生产力。古人讲，天道酬勤，春华秋实。中国人民坚持聚精会神搞建设、坚持改革开放不动摇，持之以恒，锲而不舍，推动中国发生了翻天覆地的变化。今天，中国已经成为世界第二大经济体、第一大工业国、第一大货物贸易国、第一大外汇储备国。40年来，按照可比价格计算，中国国内生产总值年均增长约9.5%；以美元计算，中国对外贸易额年均增长14.5%。中国人民生活从短缺走向充裕、从贫困走向小康，现行联合国标准下的7亿多贫困人口成功脱贫，占同期全球减贫人口总数70%以上。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have significantly unleashed and enhanced productivity in China through hard work with an unyielding spirit. Heaven rewards those who work hard, and flowers in spring come to fruition in autumn. The focused endeavor in national development and unwavering commitment to reform and opening-up of the Chinese people have brought enormous changes to the country. China has grown into the world's second largest economy, the largest industrial producer, the largest trader of goods, and the holder of the largest foreign exchange reserves. Over the past 40 years, China’s GDP has averaged an annual growth rate of around 9.5% in comparable prices and its foreign trade has registered an annual growth of 14.5% in US dollar. The Chinese people have emerged from a life of shortages and poverty and are now enjoying abundant supply and a moderately prosperous life. According to current UN standards, more than 700 million Chinese people have been lifted out of poverty, accounting for more than 70% of the global total over the same period.
——40年来，中国人民始终上下求索、锐意进取，开辟了中国特色社会主义道路。中国人民坚持立足国情、放眼世界，既强调独立自主、自力更生又注重对外开放、合作共赢，既坚持社会主义制度又坚持社会主义市场经济改革方向，既“摸着石头过河”又加强顶层设计，不断研究新情况、解决新问题、总结新经验，成功开辟出一条中国特色社会主义道路。中国人民的成功实践昭示世人，通向现代化的道路不止一条，只要找准正确方向、驰而不息，条条大路通罗马。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have blazed a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics through determined exploration with a pioneering spirit. The Chinese people have both a keen awareness of national realities and a global vision. We champion independence and self-reliance while embracing openness and win-win cooperation. We uphold the socialist system while sticking to the direction of reform to develop the socialist market economy. As we “cross the river by feeling the stones”, we have strengthened top-level planning. We have studied new circumstances, addressed new problems as they emerge and summed up experience accordingly, thus blazing a path of socialism with Chinese characteristics. The successful practice of the Chinese people is a proof that there is more than one path leading to modernization. With the right direction and with unremitting efforts, all roads will take us to Rome.
——40年来，中国人民始终与时俱进、一往无前，充分显示了中国力量。中国人民坚持解放思想、实事求是，实现解放思想和改革开放相互激荡、观念创新和实践探索相互促进，充分显示了思想引领的强大力量。中国人民勇于自我革命、自我革新，不断完善中国特色社会主义制度，不断革除各方面体制弊端，充分显示了制度保障的强大力量。中国人民敢闯敢试、敢为人先，积极性、主动性、创造性空前高涨，充分显示了13亿多人民作为国家主人和真正英雄推动历史前进的强大力量。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have kept forging ahead and demonstrated the strength of the nation through keeping pace with the progress of the times. Ours is a truth-seeking nation with an open mind. Our efforts to open up our minds have advanced side by side with our endeavor of reform and opening-up. Our search for new ideas and experiment of practices have been mutually reinforcing. Such is the great strength of a guiding vision. Ours is a nation that has courageously engaged in self-revolution and self-reform, constantly made improvements to the system of socialism with Chinese characteristics, and kept overcoming institutional and systematic obstacles to development. Such is the great strength of institutional guarantee. Ours is an enterprising and pioneering nation with unprecedented motivation, initiative and creativity. Such is the great strength of the 1.3 billion Chinese people driving history forward as masters of their nation and real heroes.
——40年来，中国人民始终敞开胸襟、拥抱世界，积极作出了中国贡献。改革开放是中国和世界共同发展进步的伟大历程。中国人民坚持对外开放基本国策，打开国门搞建设，成功实现从封闭半封闭到全方位开放的伟大转折。中国在对外开放中展现大国担当，从引进来到走出去，从加入世界贸易组织到共建“一带一路”，为应对亚洲金融危机和国际金融危机作出重大贡献，连续多年对世界经济增长贡献率超过30%，成为世界经济增长的主要稳定器和动力源，促进了人类和平与发展的崇高事业。
—Over the last four decades, the Chinese people have embraced the world with open arms and actively contributed our share to the world. Reform and opening-up is agreat process that has seen China and the world achieve development and progress together. The Chinese people have made opening-up a fundamental national policy, pursued development with an open door, and accomplished agreat transition from seclusion and semi-seclusion to all-round openness. In this process, China has lived up to its responsibility as a major country. From “bringing in” to “going global”, from WTO accession to the Belt and Road Initiative, China has made significant contribution to mitigating the Asian financial crisis and the global financial crisis. Contributing over 30% of global growth in recent years, China has become a key anchor and driver for the world economy and a positive force in advancing the noble cause of global peace and development.
今天，中国人民完全可以自豪地说，改革开放这场中国的第二次革命，不仅深刻改变了中国，也深刻影响了世界！
Today, the Chinese people can say with great pride that reform and opening-up, China’s second revolution if you like, has not only profoundly changed the country but also greatly influenced the whole world.
“天行有常”，“应之以治则吉”。中国进行改革开放，顺应了中国人民要发展、要创新、要美好生活的历史要求，契合了世界各国人民要发展、要合作、要和平生活的时代潮流。中国改革开放必然成功，也一定能够成功！
An ancient Chinese classic teaches that heaven has its own law and those who embrace it will prosper. China’s reform and opening-up meets its people’s aspiration for development, innovation and a better life. It also meets the global trend toward development, cooperation and peace. As such, China’s reform and opening-up can and will be a great success!
中国40年改革开放给人们提供了许多弥足珍贵的启示，其中最重要的一条就是，一个国家、一个民族要振兴，就必须在历史前进的逻辑中前进、在时代发展的潮流中发展。
Four decades of reform and opening-up has given us many valuable inspirations. The most important one is that for any country or nation to achieve rejuvenation, they must follow the logic of history and the trend of the times in their pursuit of progress and development.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
放眼全球，当今世界正在经历新一轮大发展大变革大调整，人类面临的不稳定不确定因素依然很多。新一轮科技和产业革命给人类社会发展带来新的机遇，也提出前所未有的挑战。一些国家和地区的人民仍然生活在战争和冲突的阴影之下，很多老人、妇女、儿童依然饱受饥饿和贫穷的折磨。气候变化、重大传染性疾病等依然是人类面临的重大挑战。开放还是封闭，前进还是后退，人类面临着新的重大抉择。
The world is undergoing a new round of major development, great change and profound readjustment. Humankind still faces many instabilities and uncertainties. The new round of technological and industrial revolution brings fresh opportunities and presents unprecedented challenges. In some countries and regions, people are still living in the shadow of war and conflict. A great many people, including the old, women and children, are suffering from hunger and poverty. Climate change and major communicable diseases remain formidable challenges. Humanity has a major choice to make between openness and isolation, and between progress and retrogression.
面对复杂变化的世界，人类社会向何处去？亚洲前途在哪里？我认为，回答这些时代之问，我们要不畏浮云遮望眼，善于拨云见日，把握历史规律，认清世界大势。
In this complex and changing world, where are we headed and where is the future of Asia? To answer these fundamental questions of our time, we must not let our vision be blocked by floating clouds. Instead, we must dispel the clouds to see the sun, as we say in Chinese, so as to have a keen grasp of the law of history and the trend of the world.
当今世界，和平合作的潮流滚滚向前。和平与发展是世界各国人民的共同心声，冷战思维、零和博弈愈发陈旧落伍，妄自尊大或独善其身只能四处碰壁。只有坚持和平发展、携手合作，才能真正实现共赢、多赢。
We live at a time with an overwhelming trend toward peace and cooperation. In a world aspiring for peace and development, the cold-war and zero-sum mentality looks even more out of place. Putting oneself on a pedestal or trying to immune oneself from adverse developments will get nowhere. Only peaceful development and cooperation can truly bring win-win or all-win results.
当今世界，开放融通的潮流滚滚向前。人类社会发展的历史告诉我们，开放带来进步，封闭必然落后。世界已经成为你中有我、我中有你的地球村，各国经济社会发展日益相互联系、相互影响，推进互联互通、加快融合发展成为促进共同繁荣发展的必然选择。
We live at a time with an overwhelming trend toward openness and connectivity. Human history shows that openness leads to progress while seclusion leaves one behind. The world has become a global village where our interests are intertwined and our economic and social progress interconnected. To promote common prosperity and development in today’s world, we have no choice but to pursue greater connectivity and integrated development.
当今世界，变革创新的潮流滚滚向前。中国的先人们早在2500多年前就认识到：“苟利于民，不必法古；苟周于事，不必循俗”。变革创新是推动人类社会向前发展的根本动力。谁排斥变革，谁拒绝创新，谁就会落后于时代，谁就会被历史淘汰。
We also live at a time with an overwhelming trend toward reform and innovation. A Chinese philosopher recognized as early as over 2,500 years ago that one doesn’t have to follow a beaten path if he wishes to benefit the people and one doesn't have to observe old conventions if he wishes to get things done. Reform and innovation are the fundamental driving force of human progress. Those who reject them will be left behind and assigned to the dustbin of history.
从顺应历史潮流、增进人类福祉出发，我提出推动构建人类命运共同体的倡议，并同有关各方多次深入交换意见。我高兴地看到，这一倡议得到越来越多国家和人民的欢迎和认同，并被写进了联合国重要文件。我希望，各国人民同心协力、携手前行，努力构建人类命运共同体，共创和平、安宁、繁荣、开放、美丽的亚洲和世界。
To follow the trend of our times and advance the well-being of all people, Iproposed the initiative to build a community with a shared future for mankind and I have since had many in-depth discussions with various parties. I am glad that this proposal has been welcomed and endorsed by a growing number of countries and their peoples. It has also been written into important UN documents. I hope that people around the world will work together toward this community with a shared future for mankind and make Asia and the world peaceful, tranquil, prosperous, open and beautiful.
——面向未来，我们要相互尊重、平等相待，坚持和平共处五项原则，尊重各国自主选择的社会制度和发展道路，尊重彼此核心利益和重大关切，走对话而不对抗、结伴而不结盟的国与国交往新路，不搞唯我独尊、你输我赢的零和游戏，不搞以邻为壑、恃强凌弱的强权霸道，妥善管控矛盾分歧，努力实现持久和平。
—With the future in mind, we need to treat each other with respect and as equals. We should uphold the five principles of peaceful coexistence, respect the social system and development path independently chosen by each country, respect each other’s core interests and major concerns, and follow a new approach to state-to-state relations featuring dialogue rather than confrontation, and partnership instead of alliance. We must refrain from seeking dominance and reject the zero-sum game. We must refrain from beggaring-thy-neighbor and reject power politics or hegemony with the strong bullying the weak. Instead, we must properly manage differences and work together for enduring peace.
——面向未来，我们要对话协商、共担责任，秉持共同、综合、合作、可持续的安全理念，坚定维护以联合国宪章宗旨和原则为核心的国际秩序和国际体系，统筹应对传统和非传统安全挑战，深化双边和多边协作，促进不同安全机制间协调包容、互补合作，不这边搭台、那边拆台，实现普遍安全和共同安全。
—With the future in mind, we need to promote dialogue and share responsibility. We should act on the vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security, and firmly uphold the international order and system underpinned by the purposes and principles of the UN Charter. An integrated approach should be taken to counter traditional and non-traditional security challenges, and coordination should be enhanced both bilaterally and multilaterally. We must ensure that various security mechanisms coordinate with each other in an inclusive and complementary manner rather than undercut each other. This will lead us to universal and common security.
——面向未来，我们要同舟共济、合作共赢，坚持走开放融通、互利共赢之路，构建开放型世界经济，加强二十国集团、亚太经合组织等多边框架内合作，推动贸易和投资自由化便利化，维护多边贸易体制，共同打造新技术、新产业、新业态、新模式，推动经济全球化朝着更加开放、包容、普惠、平衡、共赢的方向发展。
—With the future in mind, we need to engage in cooperation for win-win results. We should stay committed to openness, connectivity and mutual benefits, build an open global economy, and reinforce cooperation within the G20, APEC and other multilateral frameworks. We should promote trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, uphold the multilateral trading system, and jointly foster new technologies, new industries and new forms and models of business. This way, we will make economic globalization more open, inclusive, balanced and beneficial to all.
——面向未来，我们要兼容并蓄、和而不同，加强双边和多边框架内文化、教育、旅游、青年、媒体、卫生、减贫等领域合作，推动文明互鉴，使文明交流互鉴成为增进各国人民友谊的桥梁、推动社会进步的动力、维护地区和世界和平的纽带。
—With the future in mind, we need to uphold inclusiveness and seek harmony without uniformity. We must strengthen bilateral and multilateral cooperation in culture, education, tourism, youth, media, health, poverty reduction and other fields. We need to promote mutual learning among civilizations as it will help us build bridges of friendship, drive social progress, and safeguard peace for the region and beyond.
——面向未来，我们要敬畏自然、珍爱地球，树立绿色、低碳、可持续发展理念，尊崇、顺应、保护自然生态，加强气候变化、环境保护、节能减排等领域交流合作，共享经验、共迎挑战，不断开拓生产发展、生活富裕、生态良好的文明发展道路，为我们的子孙后代留下蓝天碧海、绿水青山。
—With the future in mind, we need to treat nature with respect and treasure our planet. It is important to have a vision of green, low-carbon and sustainable development, and respect, accommodate and protect nature. We need to increase exchanges and cooperation, share experience and jointly meet challenges in climate change, environment protection, energy conservation and emission reduction. We must pursue further progress along the path of sustainable development featuring increased production, higher living standards and healthy ecosystems so that our future generations can enjoy blue skies, clear water and lush mountains.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
去年10月召开的中共十九大宣告中国特色社会主义进入了新时代，制定了全面建设社会主义现代化强国的宏伟蓝图。中国特色社会主义进入新时代，掀开了实现中华民族伟大复兴的新篇章，开启了加强中国同世界交融发展的新画卷。
The 19th CPC National Congress held last October ushered socialism with Chinese characteristics into a new era and drew a blueprint for turning China into a great modern socialist country in all respects. This new era of socialism with Chinese characteristics marks a new chapter in China's rejuvenation and its effort for shared prosperity with the rest of the world.
一个时代有一个时代的问题，一代人有一代人的使命。虽然我们已走过万水千山，但仍需要不断跋山涉水。在新时代，中国人民将继续自强不息、自我革新，坚定不移全面深化改革，逢山开路，遇水架桥，敢于向顽瘴痼疾开刀，勇于突破利益固化藩篱，将改革进行到底。中国人民将继续大胆创新、推动发展，坚定不移贯彻以人民为中心的发展思想，落实新发展理念，建设现代化经济体系，深化供给侧结构性改革，加快实施创新驱动发展战略、乡村振兴战略、区域协调发展战略，推进精准扶贫、精准脱贫，促进社会公平正义，不断增强人民获得感、幸福感、安全感。中国人民将继续扩大开放、加强合作，坚定不移奉行互利共赢的开放战略，坚持引进来和走出去并重，推动形成陆海内外联动、东西双向互济的开放格局，实行高水平的贸易和投资自由化便利化政策，探索建设中国特色自由贸易港。中国人民将继续与世界同行、为人类作出更大贡献，坚定不移走和平发展道路，积极发展全球伙伴关系，坚定支持多边主义，积极参与推动全球治理体系变革，构建新型国际关系，推动构建人类命运共同体。
Each age and generation have their own challenges and missions. China has come a long way, but it has to overcome new challenges on its way ahead. In this new era, the Chinese nation will continue to improve itself through reform. We will stay committed to advancing reform in all respects, and prevail over whatever challenges that may lie ahead. We will tackle longstanding problems with courage and resolve, and break the impediments of vested interests to see the reform through. The Chinese people will continue to take bold steps ininnovation to boost development. Following the people-centered development philosophy and the new development vision, we will modernize our economic system, deepen the supply-side structural reform, and implement at a faster pace the strategies of innovation-driven development, rural revitalization and coordinated regional development. We will continue to work on targeted poverty alleviation and promote social equity and justice to give our people a greater sense of fulfillment, happiness, and security. The Chinese people will continue to increase openness and expand cooperation. We will stay committed to the strategy of opening-up for win-win results. We will pay equal attention to “bringing in” and “going global”, and break new ground in opening China further through links running eastward and westward, across land and over sea. We will adopt policies to promote high-standard liberalization and facilitation of trade and investment, and explore the opening of free trade ports with Chinese characteristics. The Chinese people will continue to work together with the rest of the world and make greater contribution to humanity. China will stick to the path of peaceful development, actively pursue global partnerships, firmly support multilateralism, and take an active part in reforming the global governance system. By doing so, we will be able to build a new type of international relations and promote a community with a shared future for mankind.
无论中国发展到什么程度，我们都不会威胁谁，都不会颠覆现行国际体系，都不会谋求建立势力范围。中国始终是世界和平的建设者、全球发展的贡献者、国际秩序的维护者。
No matter how much progress China has made in development, China will not threaten anyone else, attempt to overturn the existing international system, or seek spheres of influence. China will stay as determined as ever to build world peace, contribute to global prosperity and uphold the international order.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
综合研判世界发展大势，经济全球化是不可逆转的时代潮流。正是基于这样的判断，我在中共十九大报告中强调，中国坚持对外开放的基本国策，坚持打开国门搞建设。我要明确告诉大家，中国开放的大门不会关闭，只会越开越大！
A comprehensive study of world development trajectories shows that economic globalization is an irreversible trend of our times. In line with this conclusion, I emphasized in my report to the 19th CPC National Congress that China will continue to adhere to its fundamental national policy of opening-up and pursue development with its door wide open. I wish to make it clear to all that China’s door of opening-up will not be closed and will only open even wider!
实践证明，过去40年中国经济发展是在开放条件下取得的，未来中国经济实现高质量发展也必须在更加开放条件下进行。这是中国基于发展需要作出的战略抉择，同时也是在以实际行动推动经济全球化造福世界各国人民。
What has happened proves that opening-up was key to China’s economic growth over the past 40 years and in the same vein, high-quality development of China’s economy in the future can only be achieved with greater openness. Opening-up is a strategic decision made by China based on its need for development as well as a concrete action taken by China to move economic globalization forward in a way that benefits people across the world.
在扩大开放方面，中国将采取以下重大举措。
China will adopt the following major measures to pursue further opening:
第一，大幅度放宽市场准入。今年，我们将推出几项有标志意义的举措。在服务业特别是金融业方面，去年年底宣布的放宽银行、证券、保险行业外资股比限制的重大措施要确保落地，同时要加快保险行业开放进程，放宽外资金融机构设立限制，扩大外资金融机构在华业务范围，拓宽中外金融市场合作领域。在制造业方面，目前已基本开放，保留限制的主要是汽车、船舶、飞机等少数行业，现在这些行业已经具备开放基础，下一步要尽快放宽外资股比限制特别是汽车行业外资限制。
First, we will significantly broaden market access. A number of landmark measures are to be launched this year. On services, financial services in particular, important announcement was made at the end of last year on measures to raise foreign equity caps in the banking, securities and insurance industries. We will ensure that these measures are materialized and at the same time make more moves toward further opening, including accelerating the opening-up of the insurance industry, easing restrictions on the establishment of foreign financial institutions in China and expanding their business scope, and opening up more areas of cooperation between Chinese and foreign financial markets. On manufacturing, we have basically opened up this sector with a small number of exceptions on automobiles, ships and aircraft. Now these industries are also in a position to open up. Going forward, we will ease as soon as possible foreign equity restrictions in these industries, auto mobiles in particular.
第二，创造更有吸引力的投资环境。投资环境就像空气，空气清新才能吸引更多外资。过去，中国吸引外资主要靠优惠政策，现在要更多靠改善投资环境。我们将加强同国际经贸规则对接，增强透明度，强化产权保护，坚持依法办事，鼓励竞争、反对垄断。今年3月，我们组建了国家市场监督管理总局，还有一些其他新的机构，对现有政府机构作出大幅度调整，坚决破除制约使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用、更好发挥政府作用的体制机制弊端。今年上半年，我们将完成修订外商投资负面清单工作，全面落实准入前国民待遇加负面清单管理制度。
Second, we will create a more attractive investment environment. Investment environmentis like air, and only fresh air attracts more investment from the outside. China relied mainly on providing favorable policies for foreign investors in the past, but now we will have to rely more on improving the investment environment. We will enhance alignment with international economic and trading rules, increase transparency, strengthen property rights protection, uphold the rule of law, encourage competition and oppose monopoly. We established a host of new agencies such as the State Administration for Market Regulation as part of a major readjustment of government institutions this past March, the purpose of which is to remove the systematic and institutional obstacles that prevent the market from playing a decisive role in resources allocation and enable the government to better play its role. In the first six months of this year, we will finish the revision of the negative list on foreign investment and implement across the board the management system based on pre-establishment national treatment and negative list.
第三，加强知识产权保护。这是完善产权保护制度最重要的内容，也是提高中国经济竞争力最大的激励。对此，外资企业有要求，中国企业更有要求。今年，我们将重新组建国家知识产权局，完善加大执法力度，把违法成本显著提上去，把法律威慑作用充分发挥出来。我们鼓励中外企业开展正常技术交流合作，保护在华外资企业合法知识产权。同时，我们希望外国政府加强对中国知识产权的保护。
Third, we will strengthen protection of intellectual property rights (IPR). This is the centerpiece of the system for improving property rights protection, and it would provide the biggest boost to the competitiveness of the Chinese economy. Stronger IPR protection is the requirement of foreign enterprises, and even more so of Chinese enterprises. This year, we are re-instituting the State Intellectual Property Office to strengthen the ranks of its officers, step up law enforcement, significantly raise the cost for offenders and fully unlock the deterrent effect of relevant laws. We encourage normal technological exchanges and cooperation between Chinese and foreign enterprises, and protect the lawful IPR owned by foreign enterprises in China. At the same time, we hope foreign governments will also improve protection of Chinese IPR.
第四，主动扩大进口。内需是中国经济发展的基本动力，也是满足人民日益增长的美好生活需要的必然要求。中国不以追求贸易顺差为目标，真诚希望扩大进口，促进经常项目收支平衡。今年，我们将相当幅度降低汽车进口关税，同时降低部分其他产品进口关税，努力增加人民群众需求比较集中的特色优势产品进口，加快加入世界贸易组织《政府采购协定》进程。我们希望发达国家对正常合理的高技术产品贸易停止人为设限，放宽对华高技术产品出口管制。今年11月，我们将在上海举办首届中国国际进口博览会。这是个大平台，今后要年年办下去。这不是一般性的会展，而是我们主动开放市场的重大政策宣示和行动。欢迎各国朋友来华参加。
Fourth, we will take the initiative to expand imports. Domestic demand is the fundamental driving force for China’s economic development, and it is an essential requirement for us to meet the people’s ever-growing need for a better life. China does not seek trade surplus; we have a genuine desire to increase imports and achieve greater balance of international payments under the current account. This year, we will significantly lower the import tariffs for automobiles and reduce import tariffs for some other products. We will import more products that are competitive and needed by our people. We will seek faster progress toward joining the WTO Government Procurement Agreement. We hope developed countries will stop imposing restrictions on normal and reasonable trade of high-tech products and relax export controls on such trade with China. This November, we will hold the first China International Import Expo in Shanghai. It is not just another expo in an ordinary sense, but a major policy initiative and commitment taken of our own accord to open up the Chinese market. Friends from around the world are welcome to participate in the Expo
我想强调的是，我刚才宣布的这些对外开放重大举措，我们将尽快使之落地，宜早不宜迟，宜快不宜慢，努力让开放成果及早惠及中国企业和人民，及早惠及世界各国企业和人民。我相信，经过努力，中国金融业竞争力将明显提升，资本市场将持续健康发展，现代产业体系建设将加快推进，中国市场环境将大大改善，知识产权将得到有力保护，中国对外开放一定会打开一个全新的局面。
I wish to emphasize that with regard to all those major initiatives of opening-up that I have just announced, we have every intention to translate them into reality, sooner rather than later. We want the outcomes of our opening-up efforts to deliver benefits as soon as possible to all enterprises and people in China and around the world. I am confident that with these efforts, China's financial sector will be much more competitive, our capital market will continue to enjoy healthy development, the building of a system of modern industries will be accelerated, our market environment will be greatly improved, and intellectual property rights will be effectively protected. In short, China will enter a new phase of opening-up.
5年前，我提出了共建“一带一路”倡议。5年来，已经有80多个国家和国际组织同中国签署了合作协议。共建“一带一路”倡议源于中国，但机会和成果属于世界，中国不打地缘博弈小算盘，不搞封闭排他小圈子，不做凌驾于人的强买强卖。需要指出的是，“一带一路”建设是全新的事物，在合作中有些不同意见是完全正常的，只要各方秉持和遵循共商共建共享的原则，就一定能增进合作、化解分歧，把“一带一路”打造成为顺应经济全球化潮流的最广泛国际合作平台，让共建“一带一路”更好造福各国人民。
Five years ago, I put forward the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Since then, more than 80 countries and international organizations have signed cooperation agreements with China. The BRI may be China’s idea, but its opportunities and outcomes are going to benefit the world. China has no geopolitical calculations, seeks no exclusionary blocs and imposes no business deals on others. It must be pointed out that as the BRI is a new initiative, it is perfectly natural for there to be different views. As long as the parties embrace the principle of extensive consultation, joint contribution and shared benefits, we can surely enhance cooperation and resolve differences. This way, we can make the BRI the broadest platform for international cooperation in keeping with the trend of economic globalization and to the greater benefit of all our peoples.
女士们、先生们、朋友们！
Ladies and Gentlemen,Friends,
“积土而为山，积水而为海。”幸福和美好未来不会自己出现，成功属于勇毅而笃行的人。让我们坚持开放共赢，勇于变革创新，向着构建人类命运共同体的目标不断迈进，共创亚洲和世界的美好未来！
As a Chinese saying goes, “A mountain is formed by accumulation of earth and an ocean is formed by accumulation of water.” Happiness and a bright future will not appear automatically; success only favors those with courage and perseverance. Let us dedicate ourselves to openness and win-win outcomes, be brave to change and break new ground, and keep striving for a community with a shared future for mankind and a better tomorrow for Asia and the world!
最后，预祝博鳌亚洲论坛2018年年会圆满成功！
In closing, I wish this BFA Annual Conference a complete success.
谢谢大家
Thank you.
