123. 习近平在亚太经合组织第二十二次领导人非正式会议上的闭幕辞
共建面向未来的亚太伙伴关系
Shaping the Future through Asia-Pacific Partnership
——在亚太经合组织第二十二次领导人非正式会议上的开幕辞
– Opening Remark at the 22nd APEC Economic Leaders’ Meeting
中华人民共和国主席习近平
H.E. Xi Jinping, President of the People’s Republic of China
2014年11月11日，北京
Beijing, 11 November 2014
各位同事：
Dear Colleagues,
很高兴同大家聚会北京雁栖湖畔。首先，我谨对各位同事的到来，表示热烈的欢迎！
I am very glad to meet you at Yanqi Lake in Beijing. Let me first extend a warm welcome to all of you.
每年春秋两季，都有成群的大雁来到这里，雁栖湖因此得名。亚太经合组织的21个成员，就好比21只大雁。“风翻白浪花千片，雁点青天字一行。”今天，我们聚首雁栖湖，目的就是加强合作、展翅齐飞，书写亚太发展新愿景。
Each year, flocks of swan geese fly here and stay at the lake in spring and autumn, hence Yanqi Lake means the lake of swan geese. We 21 member economies of APEC are just like 21 swan geese. A line from an ancient Chinese poem reads: “The wind breaks waves into thousands of flowers on the sea; flocks of swan geese fly across the blue sky with their wings spread.” We are meeting here at Yanqi Lake to enhance cooperation and embark on a new flight to shape a new vision for the development of the Asia-Pacific region.
今年是亚太经合组织成立25周年。亚太经合组织的25年，也是亚太发展繁荣的25年。亚太经合组织见证了亚太发展的历史成就，亚太发展也赋予亚太经合组织新的使命。
This year marks the 25th anniversary of APEC. The past 25 years of APEC’s growth have also witnessed the development and prosperity of the Asia-Pacific region. APEC has witnessed the historic achievements of the Asia-Pacific’s development, which, in turn, has given APEC a new mission.
当前，世界经济复苏仍面临诸多不稳定不确定因素，亚太发展也进入新的阶段，既有机遇，也面临挑战。如何破解区域经济合作碎片化风险？如何在后国际金融危机时期谋求新的增长动力？如何解决互联互通建设面临的融资瓶颈？这些都需要我们深入思考、积极应对。
The world economic recovery still faces many unpredictable and destabilizing factors. The Asia-Pacific region has entered a new stage of development, facing both opportunities and challenges. How to tackle the risks of fragmentation of regional economic cooperation? How to create new growth momentum in the post-financial crisis period? How to remove the financing bottlenecks hindering connectivity? These are issues we need to consider and actively address.
面对新形势，我们应该深入推进区域经济一体化，打造有利于长远发展的开放格局。亚太经合组织应该发挥引领和协调作用，打破种种桎梏，迎来亚太地区更大范围、更高水平、更深层次的新一轮大开放、大交流、大融合。要打破亚太内部的封闭之门，敞开面向世界的开放之门。要在推进茂物目标的同时大力推进亚太自由贸易区进程，明确目标、方向、路线图，尽早将愿景变为现实，实现横跨太平洋两岸、高度开放的一体化安排。
In the face of new conditions, we need to intensify regional economic integration and foster an open environment that is conducive to long-term development. APEC should play a leading and coordinating role in breaking various shackles and unleash a new round of greater openness, exchange and integration at a higher level, in more areas and involving deeper structural adjustment. We need to open the closed doors within the Asia-Pacific region and open our region fully to the rest of the world. While continuing to advance the Bogor Goals, we should vigorously promote the development of the FTAAP by identifying targets and laying out directions and roadmaps. This will help realize, at an early date, the vision of completing a highly open integration arrangement that spans across the two sides of the Pacific Ocean.
面对新形势，我们应该全力推动改革创新，挖掘新的增长点和驱动力，打造强劲、可持续的增长格局。后国际金融危机时期，增长动力从哪里来？毫无疑问，动力只能从改革中来、从创新中来、从调整中来。我们要创新发展理念，从传统的要素驱动、出口驱动转变为创新驱动、改革驱动，通过结构调整释放内生动力。我们要改变市场管理模式，使市场在资源配置中起决定性作用，更好发挥政府作用。我们要推动科技创新，带动能源革命、消费革命，推动亚太地区在全球率先实现新技术革命。我们今年推动互联网经济、城镇化、蓝色经济等领域合作，探讨跨越“中等收入陷阱”问题，抓住了重大、前沿的国际经济议题，开了个好头。
In the face of new conditions, we need to vigorously promote reform and innovation, create new growth areas and driving forces, and ensure strong and sustainable growth. Where does growth momentum come from in the post-crisis period? Undoubtedly, it can only come from reform, innovation and readjustment. We need to be innovative in development approaches, pursue development through innovation and reform instead of driving it the usual way by relying on factors of production and export, and generate internal growth momentum through structural adjustment. We need to change the model of market regulations, allow the market to play a decisive role in resources allocation, and better play the role of the government. We need to advance scientific and technological innovation to facilitate energy and consumption revolution, and make the Asia-Pacific region a global leader in achieving new technological revolution. This year, we have promoted cooperation in Internet economy, urbanization and blue economy and discussed ways of leaping over the middle income trap, and a good beginning has been made in addressing all these major and urgent issues in the global economy.
面对新形势，我们应该加快完善基础设施建设，打造全方位互联互通格局。互联互通是一条脚下之路，无论是公路、铁路、航路还是网路，路通到哪里，我们的合作就在哪里。互联互通是一条规则之路，多一些协调合作，少一些规则障碍，我们的物流就会更畅通、交往就会更便捷。互联互通是一条心灵之路，你了解我，我懂得你，道理就会越讲越明白，事情就会越来越好办。实现亚太全方位互联互通，就是要让脚下之路、规则之路、心灵之路联通太平洋两岸的全体成员，打通融资贵、融资难的瓶颈，就是要加强公私伙伴关系建设，实现联动式发展。
In the face of new conditions, we need to speed up efforts to upgrade infrastructure and build comprehensive connectivity. Connectivity is about connecting physical structures. Our cooperation should extend to wherever roads, railways, air routes and the Internet take us. Connectivity is about connecting rules and regulations. When coordination and cooperation are enhanced and regulatory obstacles are reduced, logistics will become smoother and exchanges more convenient. Connectivity is also about connecting the hearts of people. With enhanced mutual understanding, we can achieve better communication and be more successful in our endeavors. In short, to achieve comprehensive connectivity in the Asia-Pacific, we should bring together all member economies on both sides of the Pacific by connecting physical structures, rules and regulations, and hearts of people. We should eliminate bottlenecks in accessing affordable financing, strengthen public-private partnerships, and achieve interconnected development.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
亚太经合组织是一个大家庭，打造发展创新、增长联动、利益融合的开放型亚太经济格局，符合所有成员共同利益。为了实现上述目标，亚太经济体需要共同构建互信、包容、合作、共赢的亚太伙伴关系，为亚太地区和世界经济发展增添动力。
We are all members of the APEC community. It meets the common interests of us all to foster an open economy in the Asia-Pacific featuring innovative development, interconnected growth and converging interests. To achieve this goal, all the economies in the region need to work together to build an Asia-Pacific partnership of mutual trust, inclusiveness, cooperation and win-win progress, and this will inject new energy into the economic development of both the Asia-Pacific and the world.
第一，共同规划发展愿景。亚太未来发展攸关每个成员利益。我们已经在启动亚太自由贸易区进程、推进互联互通、谋求创新发展等方面达成重要共识，要将共识转化为行动，规划今后5年、10年甚至25年的发展蓝图，一步步扎实向前推进。
First, we should jointly chart the course for future development. The future development of the Asia-Pacific is vital to the interests of every APEC member. Having reached important consensus on launching the process of FTAAP, promoting connectivity and pursuing innovative growth, what we should do now is to translate the consensus into action. We should draw the blueprint for development in the next five, ten or even 25 years and implement it step by step.
第二，共同应对全球性挑战。在后国际金融危机时期，我们既要抓住经济增长这个核心，加强宏观政策协调，又要妥善应对流行性疾病、粮食安全、能源安全等全球性问题，以信息共享增进彼此了解，以经验交流分享最佳实践，以沟通协调促进集体行动，以互帮互助深化区域合作。
Second, we should jointly meet global challenges. In the post-financial crisis period, we need to focus on the core task of sustaining growth and enhance macro policy coordination. We should also effectively address global issues such as epidemics, food security and energy security. We should share information to understand each other better, exchange experience to share best practices, facilitate collective actions through consultation and coordination, and boost regional cooperation through mutual assistance.
第三，共同打造合作平台。伙伴意味着一个好汉三个帮，一起做好事、做大事。我们应该将亚太经合组织打造成推动一体化的制度平台，加强经验交流的政策平台，反对贸易保护主义的开放平台，深化经济技术合作的发展平台，推进互联互通的联接平台。亚太经合组织的发展壮大有赖于大家共同支持。
Third, we should jointly build cooperation platforms. Partnership means pitching in for common goals and big initiatives. We should build APEC into an institutional platform for promoting integration, a policy platform based on experience sharing, an open platform against trade protectionism, a development platform to intensify economic and technical cooperation and a platform for boosting connectivity. A stronger and more dynamic APEC is possible only with support from all its members.
我愿在此宣布，中方将捐款1000万美元，用于支持亚太经合组织机制和能力建设，开展各领域务实合作。
I wish to announce here that China will donate 10 million US dollars to support APEC institutional and capacity building and its practical cooperation in various fields.
第四，共同谋求联动发展。伙伴意味着合作共赢、互学互鉴。当前，一些亚太发展中经济体面临较多困难，没有他们的发展，亚太发展就不可持续。我们要加大对发展中成员的资金和技术支持，发挥亚太经济体多样性突出的特点，优势互补，扩大联动效应，实现共同发展。
Fourth, we should jointly pursue interconnected development. Partnership also means win-win cooperation and mutual learning. Some developing economies in the Asia-Pacific region now face difficulties. If they cannot achieve development, development of the whole Asia-Pacific region will not be sustainable. We need to increase financial and technical support to developing members, give full rein to the strength of diversity among the Asia-Pacific economies, draw on each other’s strength, better leverage the amplifying effects and achieve common development.
未来3年，中国政府将为亚太经合组织发展中成员提供1500个培训名额，用于贸易和投资等领域的能力建设项目。
In the coming three years, the Chinese government will provide 1,500 training opportunities to APEC developing members in support of capacity-building projects in trade, investment and other fields.
各位同事！
Dear Colleagues,
在“共建面向未来的亚太伙伴关系”主题下，我们将围绕“推动区域经济一体化”，“促进经济创新发展、改革与增长”，“加强全方位基础设施与互联互通建设”三项重点议题展开讨论。我期待并相信，这次会议将为亚太发展注入新的活力。
Under the theme of Shaping the Future through Asia-Pacific Partnership, we will discuss three important topics, namely, advancing regional economic integration, promoting innovative development, economic reform and growth, and strengthening comprehensive development in infrastructure and connectivity. I am confident that our meeting today will inject new vitality into the long-term development of the Asia-Pacific region.
一花不是春，孤雁难成行。让我们以北京雁栖湖为新的起点，引领世界经济的雁阵，飞向更加蔚蓝而辽阔的天空。
A single flower does not herald spring; a lone goose cannot make a formation. Let us take Yanqi Lake as the new starting point, and lead the flying swan geese of the global economy in soaring higher in the vast and blue sky.
谢谢大家！
Thank you!
